Title: Quantum Occam Learning: Sample-Supported Expressibility for Circuit-Based Quantum Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.12211v1

Published Time: Thu, 11 Jun 2026 01:13:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# Quantum Occam Learning: Sample-Supported Expressibility for Circuit-Based Quantum Learning 

Jeongho Bang, 1, 2, ∗ Kyoungho Cho, 1, 3 and Jeongwoo Jae 4, †

> 1

Institute for Convergence Research and Education in Advanced Technology, Yonsei University, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea 

> 2

Department of Quantum Information, Yonsei University, Incheon 21983, Republic of Korea 

> 3

Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yonsei University, Seoul 03722, Republic of Korea 

> 4

Department of Physics, Hanyang University, Seoul, 04763, Republic of Korea 

(Dated: June 11, 2026) A central principle in quantum machine learning is that an ansatz should be expressive enough to represent the quantum data of interest. Yet, the expressibility is statistically meaningful only insofar as it can be learned from finitely many copies of an unknown quantum state. In this work, we develop an information-theoretic Occam theory for quantum data generated by finite-size quantum circuits. For the class Sn,G of n-qubit pure states preparable with at most G two-qubit gates, a metric-entropy argument gives the realizable sample law eΘ( G/ϵ 2)

in the circuit-limited regime. For an arbitrary source ˆρ, we introduce the best G-gate approximation error dG(ˆ ρ)

and the approximate circuit complexity Cη (ˆ ρ). We prove an agnostic quantum Occam theorem: with M copies, one can learn up to the best G-gate approximation error plus a statistical penalty eO(pG/M ). We then remove the need to know G in advance through an adaptive model-selection theorem whose oracle inequality selects the circuit complexity justified by the data. Matching lower bounds yield a sample-supported expressibility law: at trace-distance accuracy ϵ, M samples can support only Gsupported ≃ M ϵ 2 gates, up to logarithmic factors and tomography saturation at 2n. Thus, the circuit complexity becomes an adaptive statistical resource rather than a static promise. Our framework turns bounded circuit complexity into a model-selection principle for quantum machine learning. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Quantum machine learning is often motivated by the expressibility of parameterized quantum circuits. A useful ansatz should be rich enough to represent the structure of the data, the solution of a variational problem, or the effective dynamics of a physical system. The expressibility, however, is only one side of the learning problem. Quantum data are accessed through a finite number of copies, shots, or device samples. A very expressive ansatz may contain an accurate representation of the target state, while still being too large to be statistically identified from the available data. This tension is already visible in quantum state learning [1]. Full tomography of an arbitrary n-qubit pure state requires a number of copies that scales with the Hilbert-space dimension, up to logarithmic and accuracy factors [2, 3]. By contrast, many physically relevant states are not arbitrary vectors. They are generated by finite-depth circuits, local dynamics, variational ansatz classes, noisy devices, or symmetry-constrained preparation procedures. For states generated by circuits with at most 

G two-qubit gates, the metric-entropy argument developed in this work yields an information-theoretic copy complexity that is essentially linear in G, rather than in 2n, in the circuit-limited regime. This realizable law will be used as a statistical baseline derived in our framework. In this work, we develop an Occam-type learning theory for circuit-based quantum data. The first step is to remove the exact realizability assumption. Instead of asking whether the data source ˆρ belongs exactly to a fixed circuit class, we measure how close the source is to that class. This leads to the best G-gate approximation error dG(ˆ ρ) and to the approximate circuit complexity Cη (ˆ ρ). These quantities turn the circuit complexity from a static promise into a scale-dependent property of the data. Our first main result is an agnostic quantum Occam theorem. For a fixed circuit budget G, a learner can output a circuit-generated hypothesis whose trace-distance error is controlled by the best G-gate approximation error plus a statistical penalty of order eO(pG/M ). Thus, a deeper ansatz is useful only when its reduction in approximation error is large enough to compensate for its larger statistical capacity. This is the quantum-state analogue of the approximation-estimation tradeoff in statistical learning theory. Our second main result removes the assumption that the correct G is known in advance. We study a nested hierarchy of circuit classes and prove an adaptive oracle inequality: a single learner competes, up to logarithmic factors, with the best point on the full approximation curve G 7 → dG(ˆ ρ). Operationally, this gives a quantum version of structural risk minimization and minimum description length: the data may justify a larger circuit class, but only by paying the corresponding Occam penalty [4–6]. The resulting design principle is a sample-supported expressibility law. At target trace-distance accuracy 

ε, a sample budget M can uniformly support only about M ε 2 gates of circuit expressibility, until the usual tomography scale is reached. For example, if M ε 2 is of order 10 3, then a 10 4-gate ansatz may be physically implementable and highly expressive,   

> ∗jbang@yonsei.ac.kr
> †jwjae@hanyang.ac.kr
> arXiv:2606.12211v1 [quant-ph] 10 Jun 2026

2but its full expressive power is not uniformly learnable from those copies alone. The additional expressibility must then be justified by more samples, more structure, and/or a weaker task-specific loss. This perspective complements existing discussions of variational quantum algorithms, quantum generative models, trainabil-ity, barren plateaus, and ansatz expressibility [7–12]. Those issues ask whether a chosen circuit family can represent and optimize a useful solution. The present work asks a prior statistical question: how much of the chosen circuit family can be learned at all from finite quantum data, even with arbitrary collective measurements?  

> II. CIRCUIT-COMPRESSIBLE QUANTUM DATA

In this section, we define the learning problem and isolate the object that plays the role of statistical capacity. We work with 

n qubits and Hilbert-space dimension N = 2 n. All distances between quantum states are measured in trace distance [13], 

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσ) := 12 ∥ˆρ − ˆσ∥1 . (1) The learner receives M independent copies of an unknown state ˆρ and may perform an arbitrary collective POVM { ˆEy }y on 

ˆρ⊗M , followed by arbitrary classical post-processing. Thus, the results in this work are information-theoretic. They do not claim that the optimal learner is computationally efficient, nor that it can be implemented using local measurements. These restrictions are important, but they are separate from the statistical question addressed here. It is useful to distinguish three levels of difficulty. The first is the statistical difficulty: how many copies are needed by the best possible learner? This is the level studied in the present work. The second is the measurement difficulty: can the required information be extracted using local Pauli measurements, classical shadows, adaptive product measurements, or experimentally realistic measurement circuits? The third is the computational difficulty: can the resulting optimization or hypothesis-selection problem be solved efficiently? A practical quantum-learning protocol must address all three. Our theorems isolate the first level and therefore provide a lower baseline for any more constrained protocol. If a class is statistically unsupported even with arbitrary collective POVMs, then no practical measurement or training method can make it uniformly learnable without additional assumptions. Throughout this work, we use the phrase “sample complexity” in this information-theoretic sense. It is the number of copies of the unknown state, not the number of measurement shots for a fixed observable and not the number of optimization iterations. When the hypotheses are pure circuit states but the source ˆρ is arbitrary, the learner is allowed to output a pure circuit state even if the source is mixed. The resulting trace-distance error naturally includes both model mismatch and statistical error. This convention is useful because it lets us treat noisy and misspecified sources without changing the base class.  

> A. Circuit-generated hypothesis classes

Let Un,G denote the set of n-qubit unitaries that can be realized by the circuits with at most G two-qubit gates, together with any one-qubit gates allowed by a fixed universal gate convention. We define the corresponding family of pure states 

Sn,G := 

n

ˆσU = ˆU |0n⟩⟨ 0n| ˆU † : ˆU ∈ U n,G 

o

. (2) Here, |0n⟩ = |0⟩⊗n. The number G should be understood as a preparation complexity, not necessarily as the number of tunable parameters in a particular variational implementation. A circuit architecture may contain discrete choices of gate locations and continuous gate parameters. The metric entropy estimates below count both contributions. The realizable learning problem assumes that the unknown state lies exactly in Sn,G . A learner A is said to learn Sn,G to accuracy ε and confidence 1 − δ using M samples if, for every ˆρ ∈ S n,G , its output ˆρ′ satisfies 

Pr [ D(ˆ ρ, ˆρ′) ≤ ε] ≥ 1 − δ. (3) The worst-case realizable sample complexity is the smallest such M and will be denoted by Mreal (n, G, ε, δ ).This realizable model is important because it gives the baseline statistical law. However, it is too rigid for quantum learning. A device state may be mixed; a physical source may be noisy; a generative model may be misspecified; and a target state may have no exact finite-depth representation within the chosen gate alphabet. The central object should therefore be not membership in Sn,G , but distance to Sn,G .3 

> B. Approximation error and approximate circuit complexity

For an arbitrary n-qubit state ˆρ, define the best G-gate approximation error 

dG(ˆ ρ) := inf 

> ˆσ∈S n,G

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσ). (4) The function G 7 → dG(ˆ ρ) is nonincreasing. It is zero for all sufficiently large G if one allows exact or arbitrarily accurate universal pure-state synthesis and if ˆρ is pure [14, 15]; for mixed states, it measures the distance to a pure circuit-generated model. More generally, one may replace Sn,G by a noisy or purified circuit class. The present work keeps the pure-state class as the basic object because it exposes the core statistical mechanism most cleanly. The approximate circuit complexity at tolerance η is 

Cη (ˆ ρ) := min {G ∈ N : dG(ˆ ρ) ≤ η} , (5) with the convention Cη (ˆ ρ) = ∞ if no such G exists within the allowed model. This quantity is the state-learning analogue of a compression length. It asks how large a circuit is needed before the model error falls below η. The learning problem can then be phrased as follows: 

Given M copies of an unknown quantum data source ˆρ, how close can one get to ˆρ using a circuit-generated hypothesis, without knowing in advance the appropriate circuit complexity?  

> C. Metric entropy as a quantum Occam prior

The statistical capacity of Sn,G is controlled by its covering number. Let N (Sn,G , D, ε ) denote the smallest cardinality of an 

ε-net of Sn,G in trace distance. The following lemma is the metric-entropy input underlying all upper bounds in this work. 

Lemma 1 (Metric entropy of circuit-generated states) . For 0 < ε < 1/2, Sn,G admits an ε-net in trace distance with 

log N (Sn,G , D, ε ) ≤ Cent G log 

 Carch nG ε



, (6) 

for universal constants Cent , C arch > 0 depending only on the gate convention and architectural model. In architectures where the discrete layout cost is fixed or absorbed into the gate description, this becomes 

log N (Sn,G , D, ε ) ≤ Cent G log 

 Cent Gε



. (7) 

Proof sketch. —The proof is a standard Lipschitz-net argument of the kind used in metric-entropy bounds for parametrized models. A circuit layout with G two-qubit gates has O(G) continuous parameters and a number of discrete gate-location choices that contributes at most O(G log n) bits in an all-to-all architecture. For a fixed layout, the map from gate parameters to the output state is Lipschitz: changing a single gate parameter changes the final state by at most the corresponding operator-norm perturbation, and a telescoping sum over G gates gives an overall Lipschitz constant O(G). Discretizing each parameter at mesh size ε/O (G) therefore gives the stated covering number. The detailed constants are not important for the learning interpretation; what matters is that the logarithm of the covering number is linear in G up to logarithmic factors. A full derivation, including the layout count and the conversion from unitary perturbation to trace-distance perturbation, is given in Appendix A. This is the quantum Occam input, in the finite-description sense familiar from the classical Occam bounds [16]. A smaller circuit class can be described by fewer bits, and fewer bits imply a smaller statistical penalty. Here, the word “Occam” is used in this operational sense: the description length of the hypothesis class controls the number of samples required to select a good hypothesis. The passage from metric entropy to sample complexity is worth spelling out because it is the bridge between circuit design and learning theory. Suppose H is an ε-net of the state class. If the unknown state is promised to lie in the class, then some element of H is close to it. The learning task becomes a finite hypothesis-selection problem: use copies of the unknown state to identify a net point that is nearly as close as the best net point. Since the number of hypotheses is H , the logarithm of this number is the number of bits needed to name a candidate. The standard concentration and quantum hypothesis-selection arguments then show that the copy complexity scales as 

M ∼ log H

ε2 , (8) 4up to confidence terms. Thus, the metric entropy of the circuit class plays the same role as VC dimension, covering dimension, or description length in classical learning theory [4, 16]. In the present setting, the relevant description length is controlled by the gate count G.This reasoning also clarifies what is not being claimed. The learner need not recover the exact parameters of the generating circuit. The different circuits can prepare the same state, and nearby states can have very different circuit descriptions. The statistical problem is purely metric: output any hypothesis state that is close in trace distance. Conversely, a short circuit description is useful only because it implies a small covering number of the reachable state set. The theory is therefore invariant under (re)parameterizations of the ansatz circuit, as long as the reachable set and its metric entropy are unchanged. There is an additional subtlety concerning the continuous parameters. A variational circuit with O(G) real parameters might appear to require infinitely many hypotheses. The Lipschitz argument in Lemma 1 removes this problem. At accuracy ε, each parameter only needs to be specified to finite precision. The number of precision bits contributes the logarithmic factor log( G/ε ).This is why the dominant dependence is linear in G, not exponential in G.The following theorem records the corresponding realizable sample law. 

Theorem 1 (Realizable circuit-state learning benchmark) . Let 0 < ε ≤ 1/4 and 0 < δ ≤ 1/10 . In the information-theoretic learner model with arbitrary collective POVMs, the realizable sample complexity of Sn,G satisfies 

Mreal (n, G, ε, δ ) ≤ C1

ε2



G log 

 C2nG ε



+ log 1

δ



,Mreal (n, G, ε, δ ) ≥ c1

ε2



min {2n, G } + log 1

δ



, (9) 

up to universal constants. Equivalently, in the circuit-limited regime G ≪ 2n,

Mreal (n, G, ε, δ ) = eΘ

 G + log(1 /δ )

ε2



, (10) 

where eΘ hides logarithmic factors. Proof sketch. —The upper bound follows from Lemma 1 and finite quantum hypothesis selection over an ε-net. The lower bound follows by embedding a large packing into Sn,G and reducing learning to multi-way quantum hypothesis discrimination, with Fano’s inequality and Holevo information controlling the accessible information. Appendix B spells out this reduction. Before moving on, we emphasize two technical conventions that will be used repeatedly. First, the logarithmic factors asso-ciated with the discrete layout of a quantum circuit are harmless for the conceptual law. In an all-to-all architecture, specifying the qubit pair on which each two-qubit gate acts costs O(log n) bits per gate. In a geometry-restricted architecture, the number of choices can be smaller, but the light-cone constraints of the architecture may increase the number of gates needed to realize a given state. The results below may therefore be read either with the explicit entropy term in Eq. (6) or in the simplified eO

notation that suppresses such factors. Second, the lower bound should be interpreted as a worst-case statement over the class. A particular state in Sn,G may be much easier to learn than the worst-case element; for example, a product state or a stabilizer state may have a much shorter specialized description than a generic state generated by a G-gate circuit. The role of G in the theorem is therefore not to say that every G-gate state requires G/ε 2 copies, but that the class as a whole contains enough distinguishable states to force this scale for uniform learning.  

> III. AGNOSTIC QUANTUM OCCAM LEARNING

The realizable law in Theorem 1 assumes that the true state belongs to Sn,G . This is rarely the right abstraction for quantum learning. A variational ansatz may approximate the data only up to model mismatch. A laboratory state may be affected by decoherence. A quantum generative model may intentionally trade accuracy for a shorter circuit description. Therefore, the central theorem should compare the learner not with the impossible exact target inside the class, but with the best approximation available in the class.  

> A. Finite quantum hypothesis selection

We first recall the finite-class learning principle used in the proof. Let H = {ˆσ1, . . . , ˆσK } be a finite set of candidate states. A quantum hypothesis-selection procedure receives copies of an arbitrary state ˆρ and outputs an element of H. In the information-theoretic setting, one can perform a tournament based on pairwise Helstrom tests, or equivalently use a collective measurement designed for finite-state selection [2, 17]. The following statement is the finite Occam step. 5

Lemma 2 (Finite agnostic quantum selection) . There exist universal constants C, c > 0 such that the following holds. Let 

H = {ˆσ1, . . . , ˆσK } be a finite family of quantum states. Given 

M ≥ Cε2



log K + log 1

δ



(11) 

copies of an arbitrary state ˆρ, there exists an information-theoretic learner that outputs ˆσh ∈ H such that, with probability at least 1 − δ,

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσh) ≤ c inf  

> ˆσ∈H

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσ) + ε. (12) The constant c is not essential. Depending on the tournament convention and the net radius, it may be replaced by a small absolute constant such as 2, 3, or 4. What is essential is the dependence on log K and 1/ε 2. Lemma 2 is the quantum analogue of finite-class agnostic learning in classical statistical learning theory [4]. The proof does not require any local measurement constraints or computational efficiency; it uses the full power of collective quantum measurements. The intuition is as follows. For any two candidate states ˆσi and ˆσj , the Helstrom measurement is the optimal binary test for distinguishing them. If the true state ˆρ is much closer to ˆσi than to ˆσj , then the expectation of this test under ˆρ favors 

ˆσi. Repeating such comparisons across the pairs of candidates and aggregating the outcomes yields a tournament in which the candidates far from ˆρ lose to ones close to ˆρ. A union bound over all relevant comparisons accounts for the factor log K,and the variance of binary quantum tests gives the 1/ε 2 dependence. More sophisticated collective measurements can improve constants, but they do not change the scale. The agnostic nature of the statement is important. The true state ˆρ need not be one of the K candidates. The procedure only tries to find a candidate whose distance to ˆρ is comparable to the best achievable distance within H. This is exactly the form needed for misspecified quantum models. When H is a net of a circuit class, the finite selection lemma becomes a model-selection primitive: it chooses a good approximate circuit state without assuming that the data source is itself an exact net point. The selection primitive and the net-to-class conversion are detailed in Appendix B.  

> B. Fixed-complexity agnostic theorem

Combining Lemma 2 with the metric entropy of Sn,G gives the fixed-G agnostic learning theorem. 

Theorem 2 (Agnostic quantum Occam theorem) . Let ˆρ be an arbitrary n-qubit state, not assumed to belong to Sn,G . Fix G,

0 < ε ≤ 1/4, and 0 < δ ≤ 1/10 . There exists an information-theoretic learner which, using 

M ≥ Cε2



G log 



C′ nG ε



+ log 1

δ



(13) 

copies of ˆρ, outputs a hypothesis ˆσG ∈ S n,G such that, with probability at least 1 − δ,

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσG) ≤ C0dG(ˆ ρ) + ε, (14) 

where C, C ′, C 0 > 0 are universal constants. Equivalently, for fixed M , the same statement may be written as the learning curve 

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσG) ≤ C0dG(ˆ ρ) + eO

r G + log(1 /δ )

M

!

. (15) 

Proof. —Let H be an (ε/ 8) -net of Sn,G in trace distance. By Lemma 1, we have 

log H ≤ Cent G log 



Carch 

nG ε



. (16) Applying Lemma 2 to this finite class gives an output ˆσG ∈ H whose distance to ˆρ is within a constant factor of the best element of the net plus O(ε). Since every ˆσ ∈ S n,G has a net point ˆη ∈ H with D(ˆ σ, ˆη) ≤ ε/ 8, the best net error is at most dG(ˆ ρ) + ε/ 8.Absorbing constants into C0 and the additive accuracy proves Eq. (14). Solving Eq. (13) for ε gives the sample-dependent form Eq. (15) up to logarithmic factors. Appendix B gives the same argument with the intermediate inequalities displayed explicitly. 6Theorem 2 is our first main result. It turns the realizable circuit-learning theorem into an agnostic statement about arbitrary quantum data. The bound has two terms: 

dG(ˆ ρ)

| {z } 

approximation error 

+ eO

p G/M 

| {z }

estimation error 

. (17) The first term decreases as the ansatz becomes more expressive. The second term increases with the statistical capacity of the ansatz. Therefore, a larger quantum circuit is not better from the viewpoint of learning. It is better only when the reduction in 

dG(ˆ ρ) is worth the larger estimation penalty. There are three basic regimes. In the under-expressive regime, G is so small that dG(ˆ ρ) dominates. More samples do not help much, because the model itself cannot approximate the source. In the sample-limited regime, G is large enough to reduce 

dG(ˆ ρ), but the statistical term remains dominant. More samples are valuable here, because they allow the learner to use the same ansatz more accurately or to move to a larger supported ansatz. In the model-saturated regime, dG(ˆ ρ) has already reached the noise floor or the intrinsic approximation limit of the chosen model family. Increasing G beyond this point only increases the statistical burden. This regime structure is familiar in classical nonparametric statistics, but the quantum setting gives a distinct interpretation. The model size is not merely a number of classical parameters; it is the complexity of a quantum circuit family. The estimation term is not merely shot noise for a fixed observable; it is the cost of identifying an unknown quantum state in a large hypothesis class. The approximation term is not merely a function-class bias; it is the trace-distance error of the best circuit-generated quan-tum state. The resulting theory therefore imports the classical approximation-estimation philosophy into a genuinely quantum state-learning setting. A useful corollary is obtained by choosing G = Cη (ˆ ρ).

Corollary 1 (Learning from approximate circuit complexity) . Suppose Cη (ˆ ρ) < ∞. Then, there exists an information-theoretic learner which, using 

M = eO

 Cη (ˆ ρ) + log(1 /δ )

ε2



(18) 

copies, outputs a circuit-generated hypothesis ˆσcg satisfying 

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσcg ) ≤ C0η + ε (19) 

with probability at least 1 − δ, up to logarithmic factors. 

Thus, approximate circuit complexity directly controls the number of copies needed to obtain a compressed circuit represen-tation of a quantum data source. The dependence is linear in Cη (ˆ ρ) and quadratic in 1/ε , just as in the realizable benchmark. The difference is conceptual: Cη (ˆ ρ) is a property of an arbitrary source, not a promise that the source belongs exactly to a model class. Theorem 2 also gives a simple way to reason about approximation curves. Suppose, for instance, that the source has an exponentially decaying circuit-approximation error, 

dG(ˆ ρ) ≤ Ae −αG , (20) for constants A, α > 0 over the relevant range. Balancing this with the statistical term pG/M suggests an optimal G that grows only logarithmically with M before the statistical term dominates. In such a case, the data do not justify using the largest available ansatz once the approximation error has fallen below the statistical floor. On the other hand, if the approximation curve decays polynomially, 

dG(ˆ ρ) ≤ AG −β , (21) then balancing G−β with pG/M gives the scale 

Gopt (M ) ≍ M 1/(2 β+1) (22) up to logarithmic factors. The corresponding error decreases as M −β/ (2 β+1) . These familiar approximation-estimation calcu-lations are not themselves theorems about a particular physical source; rather, they illustrate how the agnostic bound converts a physical approximation curve into a sample-dependent ansatz-depth prescription. 7The same reasoning applies to noise. If ˆρ = (1 − p)ˆ σ + pˆω with ˆσ ∈ S n,G and arbitrary noise state ˆω, then dG(ˆ ρ) ≤

pD (ˆ ω, ˆσ) ≤ p. Theorem 2 gives 

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσG) ≲ p + eO

p G/M 



. (23) Thus, the irreducible noise level and the finite-sample error enter additively. If the noise is larger than the statistical radius, collecting more samples will not improve the error unless the model class is changed to include the noise process. If the statistical radius is larger than the noise, then the dominant limitation is the sample budget.  

> C. Why the statistical penalty is unavoidable

The statistical penalty in Theorem 2 cannot be removed in general. The reason is simple: the agnostic problem contains the realizable problem as the special case dG(ˆ ρ) = 0 . Any learner satisfying Eq. (15) uniformly over arbitrary ˆρ must in particular learn every state in Sn,G . The lower bound in Theorem 1 therefore implies the following. 

Corollary 2 (Agnostic lower bound from the realizable subcase) . For 0 < ε ≤ 1/4 and constant failure probability, any learner that guarantees D(ˆ ρ, ˆσ) ≤ ε for all ˆρ ∈ S n,G must use 

M ≥ Ω

 min {2n, G }

ε2



(24) 

copies. Consequently, the pG/M estimation term in Eq. (15) is optimal up to logarithmic factors in the circuit-limited regime. 

This lower bound is independent of computational efficiency, optimization, or training heuristics. It says that even a learner with arbitrary collective measurements cannot uniformly resolve G-gate data below the G/ε 2 sample scale. At a high level, the lower-bound construction says that Sn,G contains a large local code. In the regime G ≪ 2n, one may choose k ≃ log G qubits and use O(G) gates to synthesize a large packing of k-qubit states, while leaving the remaining qubits fixed. This gives exponentially many hypotheses in G that are separated in trace distance. If a learner could estimate every state in this packing with fewer than order G/ε 2 copies, then its output could be converted into a decoder for the packing index. Fano’s inequality would require the measurement transcript to contain order G bits of information about that index [18]. Holevo-type information bounds limit how much information each copy can reveal when the hypotheses are locally separated at scale ε,producing the 1/ε 2 factor. This packing intuition is also useful for understanding the sample-supported expressibility law. Unsupported expressibility is not an abstract parameter-counting pathology. It means that the ansatz class contains too many mutually distinguishable states for the available copies to resolve. A training algorithm may still choose a state, but the choice cannot be certified uniformly because there are many alternatives that remain statistically plausible.  

> IV. ADAPTIVE ANSATZ SELECTION AND SAMPLE-SUPPORTED EXPRESSIBILITY

In practice, the circuit complexity of the data is not known. Choosing G too small produces a large approximation error; choosing G too large produces a large statistical error and can make the model unsupported by the data. The natural goal is therefore to construct a single learner that adapts to this unknown tradeoff.  

> A. A hierarchy of circuit classes

Let 

1 = G0 < G 1 < G 2 < · · · < G J = Gmax (25) be a dyadic hierarchy, for example Gj = 2 j . The corresponding state classes are nested: 

Sn,G 0 ⊆ S n,G 1 ⊆ · · · ⊆ S n,G J . (26) For each j, let Hj be an εj -net of Sn,G j and let Lj = log Hj be its description length. By Lemma 1, 

Lj ≤ Cent Gj log 



Carch 

nG j

εj



. (27) 8We also assign a prior weight πj > 0 to each model level, with P 

> j

πj ≤ 1. A convenient choice is πj ∝ (j + 1) −2, which costs only a log j penalty in the final bound. These prior weights are not Bayesian assumptions about the data; they are union-bound weights or description-length penalties. An adaptive learner may now be constructed by taking the union of the finite nets, 

Hall =

> J

[

> j=0

Hj , (28) and performing a penalized quantum hypothesis-selection tournament. The candidates from more complex classes are allowed, but they must overcome a larger complexity penalty. This is the quantum analogue of structural risk minimization [4] and minimum description length [5, 6]. A schematic version of the adaptive learner is shown in Algorithm 1. The algorithm is not intended as an efficient training routine. Its role is to make the statistical logic explicit. Each circuit class is discretized into a finite net, quantum hypothesis selection is used to compare candidates, and a penalty prevents the learner from choosing a high-complexity candidate merely because the class is large. Appendix C provides the detailed oracle-inequality proof behind this construction. 

Algorithm 1 Adaptive quantum Occam learner                                      

> Require: Mcopies of an unknown state ˆρ; dyadic levels Gj= 2 j; confidence weights πj.
> 1: for j= 0 ,1, . . . , J do
> 2: Build a trace-distance net Hjfor Sn,G jat radius proportional to rj(M, δ ).
> 3: Assign the level penalty rj(M, δ )defined by Eq. (29).
> 4: end for
> 5: Let Hall =SJj=0 Hj.
> 6: Run finite quantum hypothesis selection over Hall .
> 7: return a candidate ˆσminimizing tournament score plus complexity penalty.

The penalty can be interpreted as a confidence radius. A large class has a larger net and thus a larger chance of containing a hypothesis that looks artificially good on finite data. The penalty corrects for this multiplicity. In a minimum-description-length interpretation, Lj = log Hj is the number of bits to specify a hypothesis at level j, and the term log(1 /π j ) is the number of bits to specify the level itself. The total description length determines the statistical price.  

> B. Adaptive quantum Occam theorem

There are several equivalent ways to state the adaptive result. The cleanest form uses an implicit complexity radius. For each 

Gj , define rj (M, δ ) as the smallest positive number satisfying 

M r 2 

> j

≥ C log N (Sn,G j , D, r j /16) + log(1 /π j δ) . (29) Using Lemma 1, this radius obeys 

rj (M, δ ) = eO

r Gj + log(1 /π j δ)

M

!

. (30) 

Theorem 3 (Adaptive quantum Occam theorem) . Let ˆρ be an arbitrary n-qubit state. There exists an information-theoretic learner, not given the correct circuit complexity, such that with probability at least 1 − δ its output ˆσ satisfies 

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσ) ≤ C0 inf 

> 0≤j≤J

dGj (ˆ ρ) + rj (M, δ ) (31) 

for a universal constant C0 > 0. Equivalently, 

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσ) ≤ C0 inf 

> G≤Gmax

"

dG(ˆ ρ) + eO

r G + log(1 /δ )

M

!# 

, (32) 

where the infimum over G is understood up to the dyadic discretization and logarithmic prior factors. 9

Proof sketch. —For each level j, take a net Hj at resolution proportional to rj (M, δ ) and assign it failure probability πj δ.Applying Lemma 2 at level j gives a high-probability agnostic guarantee for that level. A union bound over j makes all level-wise guarantees hold simultaneously with probability at least 1 − δ. The adaptive learner then selects the candidate minimizing the penalized tournament score, where the penalty is proportional to rj (M, δ ). On the simultaneous good event, the selected candidate cannot be much worse than the best candidate at any level because any excess empirical fit must be paid for by the corresponding penalty. Taking the infimum over j yields Eq. (31). Substituting the entropy estimate gives Eq. (32). Appendix C gives a weighted-union proof that makes the union bound and the role of the prior weights explicit. Theorem 3 is our second main result. It says that a single learner can adapt to the unknown circuit complexity of the data. The learner pays, up to logarithmic factors, the same price it would have paid had the best G been known beforehand. In this sense, 

G becomes a data-selected resource rather than a fixed promise. It is helpful to view the theorem as a simultaneous confidence statement over the entire approximation curve. For each Gj ,the quantity dGj (ˆ ρ) is not known to the learner. The learner does not estimate this curve explicitly. Instead, the tournament implicitly compares candidates from different levels. The oracle inequality then says that, after the fact, the selected candidate performs almost as well as the best level on the curve. This is the same logic that makes structural risk minimization powerful in classical learning: the procedure does not need to know the correct complexity, because the penalty allows all complexities to be compared on a common statistical scale. One may also interpret the theorem as a form of quantum model selection under misspecification. If the true state is exactly in a small class, say ˆρ ∈ S n,G ∗ , then dG∗ (ˆ ρ) = 0 and the adaptive learner pays essentially the G∗-level penalty. If the true state is not in any small class but is well approximated by a sequence of larger classes, the learner automatically balances approximation and estimation. If the true state is arbitrary and no low-complexity approximation exists, then the infimum moves toward the tomography scale. Thus, the theorem interpolates among realizable low-complexity learning, agnostic compressed learning, and ordinary high-dimensional tomography within a single inequality. One can regard Eq. (31) as the quantum analogue of a penalized empirical-risk bound. If bR(ˆ σ) denotes the empirical tourna-ment score of a candidate and pen(ˆ σ) is the radius associated with the smallest level containing it, the learner is conceptually minimizing 

bR(ˆ σ) + pen(ˆ σ), pen(ˆ σ) ≃

 Λ(ˆ σ, r )

M

1/2

, (33) where 

Λ(ˆ σ, r ) := log N (Sn,G (ˆ σ), D, r ) + log 1

πG(ˆ σ)δ . (34) The empirical score rewards agreement with the observed copies; the penalty charges for the size of the model class in which the candidate lives. A complex candidate must fit the data sufficiently better than a simple candidate to overcome its larger penalty. This is the formal version of the statement that samples justify expressibility. The prior weights πj play a modest but conceptually useful role. If all model levels were treated equally without penalty, then a union bound over many possible levels would fail. Choosing πj ∝ (j + 1) −2 assigns a finite total failure probability and adds only a logarithmic correction. In MDL language, this is the cost of specifying the model level before specifying the circuit inside that level. In practical ansatz selection, such a term is analogous to a preference for simpler architectures unless a deeper architecture gives a statistically significant improvement. Theorem 3 is robust to the exact discretization of G. A dyadic grid loses at most a factor of two in circuit size: if the best gate budget is G, then some dyadic level satisfies G ≤ Gj ≤ 2G. Since all bounds are stated up to universal constants and logarithmic factors, this discretization has no effect on the main scaling. One may replace the dyadic hierarchy by any nested architecture family, such as layers of a hardware-efficient ansatz, provided a metric-entropy bound is available for each level. Theorem 3 also gives a clear interpretation of ansatz depth. For a fixed sample budget M , the statistically optimal depth is not necessarily the largest implementable depth. Instead, it is the depth minimizing the tradeoff 

ΦM (G; ˆ ρ) := dG(ˆ ρ) + eO

r GM

!

. (35) If dG(ˆ ρ) decreases rapidly with G, a deeper ansatz is justified. If dG(ˆ ρ) has already saturated, additional gates increase the statistical penalty without improving approximation. This is the quantum Occam principle in operational form. 10                          

> Regime Relation Interpretation Sample-supported G≲M ε 2Uniform trace-distance learning can be certified. Unsupported expressibility G≫M ε 2Extra ansatz freedom is not resolved by the available copies. Tomography saturation G≳2nThe full pure-state dimension is the bottleneck. TABLE I. Sample-supported expressibility regimes. The boundary is governed by the statistical radius ϵstat (G, M )∼pG/M ; hence
> G∼M ε 2at target accuracy ε.
> C. The sample-supported expressibility law

The adaptive theorem can be turned around. Suppose the target accuracy is ε. For a circuit class of size G to be uniformly learnable at this accuracy, its statistical penalty must be no larger than ε. Ignoring logarithmic factors, this means 

r GM ≲ ε, (36) or equivalently, 

G ≲ M ε 2. (37) The lower bound in Corollary 2 shows that the same relation is necessary, up to logarithmic factors, in the circuit-limited regime. We therefore obtain the third main result. 

Corollary 3 (Sample-supported expressibility law) . At trace-distance accuracy ε and confidence bounded away from zero, a sample budget M can uniformly support circuit expressibility only up to 

Gsupported (M, ε ) = eΘ  M ε 2 (38) 

in the regime G ≪ 2n. Including the tomography saturation gives 

Gsupported (M, ε ) = eΘ  min {2n, M ε 2} . (39) 

Consequently, ansatz classes with G ≫ M ε 2 are statistically unsupported for uniform learning at accuracy ε, even when arbitrary collective measurements are allowed. 

This law is not a statement about physical implementability. A quantum processor may be able to implement a circuit with 

G ≫ M ε 2 gates. Nor is it a statement about whether the target state lies somewhere inside that large ansatz class. Rather, it is a statement about statistical identifiability: with only M copies, the learner cannot uniformly resolve all degrees of freedom made available by such an expressive class. Table I summarizes the law. It should be read as a statistical design rule for circuit-based quantum learning. Given a target accuracy ε and a copy budget M , using an ansatz substantially above M ε 2 gates may still be useful for heuristic optimization, interpolation, or task-specific prediction, but it is not justified by a uniform trace-distance learning guarantee. Conversely, if the data are known to have approximate circuit complexity Cη (ˆ ρ) ≪ M ε 2, then the learning problem is statistically feasible at accu-racy η + ε. Appendix D visualizes both the approximation-estimation tradeoff and the boundary Gsupported = min {2n, M ε 2}.There is a useful contrapositive. Suppose one insists on using an ansatz of complexity G and wants a global trace-distance guarantee. Then, the required number of copies must scale at least as 

M ≳ Gε2 (40) up to logarithmic factors, unless G has already saturated the full pure-state manifold. Thus, the same theorem can be used in two directions. Given M , it tells us the supported expressibility. Given G, it tells us the required sample budget. This dual reading is often the most convenient one for experimental planning. The law also distinguishes two notions of “large data.” In classical machine learning, the number of examples is often com-pared with the number of parameters. In quantum state learning, the number of copies should be compared with the number of statistically distinguishable quantum hypotheses at the target resolution. A model with many trainable parameters but strong redundancy may have a smaller metric entropy than its raw parameter count. Conversely, a model with few architectural pa-rameters but a large set of discrete choices may have a larger description length than expected. The metric-entropy formulation keeps track of the quantity that matters for learning. 11 This observation is particularly relevant for hardware-efficient ansatz classes. A hardware-efficient circuit with many layers may have many parameters, but symmetries, parameter tying, limited connectivity, or noise-induced concentration can reduce the effective set of distinguishable output states. Conversely, a family that allows many different qubit-pair layouts may have a larger entropy than a fixed layered architecture with the same number of continuous angles. Thus, in applying the theorem, G

should be viewed as a proxy for metric entropy. When a sharper entropy estimate is available, it can be substituted directly into the Occam penalty. The same logic applies to hybrid classical-quantum models. If a classical preprocessing step selects among many circuit architectures, the description length of that selection contributes to the overall capacity. If a classical neural network controls the parameters of a quantum circuit, then the capacity of the composite model may exceed the raw gate count. The theorem therefore encourages a complete accounting of all choices that enlarge the hypothesis family. What matters is not where the expressibility comes from, but how many distinguishable quantum hypotheses it makes available at the target resolution. One may also express the law in terms of an effective statistical dimension. Define 

dstat (G) := min {2n, G } (41) up to logarithmic factors. The realizable lower bound says that M ε 2 ≳ dstat (G) is necessary. The upper bound says that it is sufficient up to logs. Thus, M ε 2 plays the role of the number of statistically resolvable circuit degrees of freedom. This is analogous to the way the number of samples in a classical parametric model determines the number of parameters that can be estimated at a target accuracy, but here the parameter count is replaced by the metric entropy of the quantum circuit family. The saturation at 2n deserves emphasis. If G exceeds the state-synthesis threshold, then increasing G does not create a statistically larger pure-state class, because the class has already become essentially all pure states. The sample complexity is then the tomography complexity. Therefore the complete picture is not that the sample cost grows forever with G, but that it grows with G until it reaches the Hilbert-space dimension. In the low-complexity regime relevant for near-term circuit models, the linear-in-G law is the operative one.  

> D. Overparameterization, underspecification, and quantum data

Classical machine learning often benefits from overparameterization [19], and it would be misleading to claim that large quantum ansatz classes are always bad. The message here is more precise. The bounds concern uniform learning of an unknown quantum state in trace distance. They do not rule out favorable distributions, benign inductive biases, task-specific losses, or optimization dynamics that select simple solutions inside a large model. What they do show is that such favorable behavior cannot be guaranteed from expressibility alone. There is also an underspecification aspect. When G ≫ M ε 2, many hypotheses in Sn,G may be statistically indistinguishable at the available sample size. The training may select one of them, but the choice is not forced by the data. This phenomenon is particularly relevant for quantum generative modeling, where a learned circuit may reproduce certain measurements while remaining far in trace distance from the source. The sample-supported expressibility law identifies the scale at which this ambiguity becomes unavoidable in the worst case.  

> V. IMPLICATIONS FOR QUANTUM MACHINE LEARNING

The theorems above are information-theoretic, but their interpretation is practical. They convert bounded circuit complexity into a statistical resource and provide a sample-dependent rule for ansatz selection. In this section, we discuss several implica-tions and clarify the relation to prior studies.  

> A. Quantum generative modeling and variational ansatz design

Quantum generative models aim to learn a quantum state, a measurement distribution, or a data-generating process using a parameterized quantum circuit [9, 10]. A common design instinct is to make the ansatz expressive enough to cover the target family. Our results imply that this is only half of the design problem. The sample budget supplies an independent upper scale: 

Gansatz ≲ M ε 2 (42) if the goal is uniform state learning in trace distance at accuracy ε. If an ansatz is much deeper than this scale, then its additional expressibility is not statistically resolved by the data. From the viewpoint of Occam learning, the larger ansatz should be accompanied by either more samples, stronger structural assumptions, or a weaker task-specific loss. 12 This observation complements the literature on barren plateaus and trainability [8, 11]. Barren plateau results ask whether an optimization landscape provides useful gradients. The sample-supported expressibility law asks a different question: even if the optimizer were ideal, are there enough quantum samples to identify the target within the chosen hypothesis class? A model may be trainable but statistically unsupported, or statistically appropriate but hard to optimize. Both constraints matter. The law can be used as a practical planning rule. Suppose an experiment can prepare M copies of a state and the desired trace-distance accuracy is ε. Then, before choosing a variational architecture, one should compare the intended gate count with 

M ε 2. If G is below this scale, the ansatz is not ruled out statistically. If G is far above it, then a uniform state-learning guarantee requires either more copies or additional assumptions, such as locality of observables, a known symmetry sector, a restricted distribution over targets, or a task loss weaker than global trace distance. This is not meant to replace empirical validation, but it gives a first-principles scale for whether the expressibility of a proposed ansatz is supported by the data.  

> B. Quantum data compression

The approximate circuit complexity Cη (ˆ ρ) gives a natural compression interpretation. If Cη (ˆ ρ) = G, then ˆρ can be repre-sented, up to error η, by a circuit description of length roughly G log G bits plus continuous parameter precision. Corollary 1 says that 

M = eO

 Cη (ˆ ρ)

ε2



(43) copies suffice to learn such a compressed representation to accuracy η + ε. Thus, quantum state learning and quantum data com-pression are two sides of the same problem. A source is sample-efficiently learnable precisely when it has a short approximate circuit description at the relevant accuracy. This viewpoint is useful for noisy intermediate-scale devices. Suppose an experimental state is produced by an intended depth-G circuit followed by noise. If the noise is weak in trace distance, then dG(ˆ ρ) is small and the agnostic theorem gives a meaningful guarantee. If the noise accumulates so that dG(ˆ ρ) becomes large, then a pure circuit-generated model is no longer appropriate. One should enlarge the hypothesis class to include noisy circuits, mixed states generated by purification, or effective channels. The same Occam logic applies once the metric entropy of the enlarged class is known.  

> C. Relation to tomography

The present framework recovers ordinary tomography as a limiting case. When G is large enough to approximate arbitrary 

n-qubit pure states, the effective dimension saturates at 2n. The lower bound in Theorem 1 then becomes 

M ≳ 2n

ε2 , (44) which is the usual pure-state tomography scale. Thus, the circuit-complexity law does not contradict tomography; it interpolates between tomography and low-complexity learning. The relevant statistical dimension is 

deff (n, G ) ≃ min {2n, G }, (45) up to logarithmic factors. This interpolation is important for quantum machine learning because it separates two barriers. The Hilbert-space dimension barrier is unavoidable for arbitrary states. The circuit-complexity barrier is the relevant one for compressible states. If a learning problem appears to require exponentially many samples, the reason may be that the data are not known to be compressible, or that the ansatz class is too broad. Conversely, if a state family is generated by circuits of size G ≪ 2n, then the tomography barrier is not the correct benchmark [20].  

> D. Relation to previous study on low-complexity quantum states

After deriving the realizable component within the present metric-entropy and packing framework, we note that its scaling is consistent with existing sample-complexity laws for learning states and unitaries of bounded circuit complexity; in particular, Ref. [1] obtains a linear-in-G dependence, up to logarithmic and accuracy factors, in a related bounded-complexity setting. The present work then goes beyond the realizable comparison by treating circuit complexity as approximate, unknown, and selected by finite samples. 13                                

> Aspect Realizable bounded-complexity learning Quantum Occam learning in this work Target assumption ˆρ∈ S n,G for a known or promised GArbitrary ˆρ, measured by dG(ˆ ρ)and Cη(ˆ ρ)
> Main guarantee Learn a G-gate state with eΘ( G/ε 2)copies Compete with the best approximation-estimation tradeoff Role of GStatic promise on the target class Adaptive statistical resource selected by the data QML interpretation Bounded circuit complexity breaks the tomography barrier Finite samples determine usable ansatz expressibility Design message If the target has Ggates, G/ε 2samples are enough Use ansatz complexity only up to G∼M ε 2,unless additional structure is available
> TABLE II. Conceptual difference between the realizable bounded-complexity learning law and the agnostic-adaptive Occam principle devel-oped here. The realizable law is the base theorem; the new QML content comes from treating circuit complexity as an unknown, approximate, and sample-supported quantity.

The distinction is threefold. First, our main object is agnostic: the target ˆρ need not lie in Sn,G . The central quantity is the approximation curve G 7 → dG(ˆ ρ), or equivalently the approximate circuit complexity Cη (ˆ ρ). Second, the circuit complexity is not assumed known. The adaptive theorem gives a model-selection guarantee over a hierarchy of ansatz classes and compares the learner with the best tradeoff over all G. Third, the final message is a design law for quantum machine learning: a sample budget M supports only G ∼ M ε 2 circuit expressibility at accuracy ε.This shift matters conceptually. A realizable theorem answers the question, “How many copies are needed if the target is known to be a G-gate state?” The agnostic-adaptive theory answers a different question, “Given finite quantum data and no exact model promise, how much circuit complexity can be justified by the samples?” The latter is closer to the way ansatz classes are used in quantum machine learning.  

> E. Comparison with the realizable bounded-complexity viewpoint

The difference between a realizable bounded-complexity theorem and the present Occam-learning viewpoint can be summa-rized in Table II. The linear-in-G sample law is not presented as an isolated new phenomenon. Rather, it is used as the statistical engine for a broader model-selection statement. This distinction is important because many quantum machine-learning prob-lems do not come with a reliable exact circuit-size promise. They come with data, a family of possible ansatz architectures, and uncertainty about how much structure is real rather than noise or finite-sample fluctuation.  

> VI. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION

We have developed an information-theoretic Occam theory for circuit-based quantum learning. The starting point was the observation that the expressibility by itself is not a sufficient design principle for quantum machine learning: a circuit family may contain accurate hypotheses, but finite quantum data may not support the statistical resolution needed to identify them. We formalized this tension for the class Sn,G of n-qubit pure states generated by at most G two-qubit gates, with all states and operators written as hatted quantities such as ˆρ, ˆσ, and ˆU . The metric-entropy estimate for this class shows that its logarithmic covering number grows essentially linearly with G, up to the architecture-dependent logarithmic factors. Combined with finite quantum hypothesis selection, this yields the realizable benchmark Mreal (n, G, ε, δ ) = eΘ(( G + log(1 /δ )) /ε 2) in the circuit-limited regime G ≪ 2n. This benchmark is the statistical backbone of this work. The main conceptual step was to move beyond exact realizability. For an arbitrary source ˆρ, possibly mixed, noisy, or misspec-ified relative to the chosen pure-circuit model, we introduced the best G-gate approximation error dG(ˆ ρ) and the approximate circuit complexity Cη (ˆ ρ). The fixed-complexity agnostic theorem shows that, with M copies, an information-theoretic learner can output a circuit-generated hypothesis whose trace-distance error is bounded by the best approximation error in Sn,G plus the statistical radius eO(pG/M ). Thus, the gate budget plays the same structural role as a statistical dimension: increasing G can reduce approximation error, but it also increases the number of distinguishable hypotheses that must be resolved from data. The adaptive theorem removes the assumption that the correct circuit budget is known in advance. By placing a hierarchy of circuit classes under an Occam penalty, the learner satisfies an oracle inequality that competes with the best point on the full approximation curve G 7 → dG(ˆ ρ). In this sense, circuit complexity is not a fixed promise about the target; it is a data-selected resource. The theorem implements a quantum analogue of structural risk minimization and minimum description length: a more expressive ansatz is selected only when its improvement in fit is large enough to pay for its larger metric entropy. Combining the upper bounds with the matching lower-bound scale gives the sample-supported expressibility law. At trace-distance accuracy ε, a budget of M copies can uniformly support only Gsupported = eΘ( M ε 2) gates in the circuit-limited regime, with saturation at the pure-state tomography scale 2n. Equivalently, an ansatz with G ≫ M ε 2 may be implementable and may 14 contain the target state, but its full uniform trace-distance expressibility is statistically unsupported by the available copies, even if arbitrary collective measurements are allowed. The law should therefore be read as a sample-dependent design rule: either keep the ansatz within the supported scale, supply additional structure, collect more copies, or relax the learning objective to a weaker task-specific loss. Our work point to natural extensions. A practically complete theory should combine the Occam capacity term with mea-surement restrictions, such as, local Pauli measurements [21], classical shadows [22], or shallow measurement circuits [23, 24]. It should also quantify the metric entropy of noisy and hardware-constrained ansatz families, where the decoherence, locality, parameter tying, symmetries, or conservation laws may reduce the effective number of distinguishable states. Another important direction is to connect the sample-supported expressibility with trainability: barren plateaus and/or optimization barriers deter-mine whether a statistically appropriate model can be found, while the Occam law determines how much model class can be justified by the available quantum data. These are complementary rather than competing constraints. The broader implication is that bounded circuit complexity should be viewed as a statistical modeling principle for quantum data. In ordinary tomography, the Hilbert-space dimension sets the relevant scale; in circuit-compressible learning, the metric entropy of the reachable circuit states replaces that dimension until tomography saturation is reached. This changes how one should interpret ansatz expressibility in quantum machine learning. More gates do not automatically mean a better learning model. More gates are useful only when the source has approximation structure that the samples can support. The quantum Occam perspective therefore supplies a bridge between variational-circuit design, quantum generative modeling, and quantum data compression: it tells us not only what a circuit family can express, but what finite quantum data can actually justify learning. 

> ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work was supported by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (MSIP) by the National Research Foundation of Korea (RS-2024-00432214, RS-2025-03532992, and RS-2025-18362970) and the Institute of Information and Communications Technology Planning and Evaluation grant funded by the Korean government (RS-2019-II190003, “Research and Development of Core Technologies for Programming, Running, Implementing and Validating of Fault-Tolerant Quantum Computing Sys-tem”), the Korean ARPA-H Project through the Korea Health Industry Development Institute (KHIDI), funded by the Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea (RS-2025-25456722), and the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Resources (MOTIR), Korea, under the project “Industrial Technology Infrastructure Program” (RS-2024-00466693). We acknowledge the Yonsei University Quantum Computing Project Group for providing support and access to the Quantum System One (Eagle Processor), which is operated at Yonsei University. 

> Appendix A: Metric entropy of circuit-generated states

This appendix gives the detailed covering-number argument used in Lemma 1. The purpose of the argument is not to optimize constants, but to identify the quantity that controls the statistical capacity of a circuit-generated state class. At resolution η, a continuous family of circuits becomes a finite family because each gate parameter only needs finite precision. The number of bits needed to specify this finite approximation is the metric entropy.  

> 1. Circuit normal form and gate-count convention

Fix an architecture and a gate convention. For each layout ℓ with at most G two-qubit gate locations, write the corresponding unitary as 

ˆUℓ(θ) = ˆWqG 

 θqG 

 ˆWqG −1

 θqG −1

 · · · ˆW1(θ1), (A1) where q = O(1) allows a constant number of elementary one- and two-qubit factors per counted two-qubit gate. Each elementary factor acts nontrivially on at most two qubits and depends on at most s = O(1) real parameters. The constants q and s depend only on the chosen gate convention. The statement in Lemma 1 uses the usual bounded-complexity convention in which the single-qubit gates are either counted at constant overhead, absorbed into neighboring two-qubit gate blocks, fixed by the architecture, or drawn from a fixed finite gate set. If an alternative architecture allows an arbitrary independent layer of continuous one-qubit rotations on all n qubits at no cost, then the right-hand side of Eq. (6) should be augmented by an additional term of order n log( C/η ). This modification does not change the Occam mechanism; it simply says that every continuous degree of freedom that enlarges the reachable state set must be included in the entropy. Throughout our main text, G denotes the effective circuit description length after this convention has been fixed. 15 We assume that each elementary gate is parameterized over a compact domain, for example, a product of intervals of length at most a convention-dependent constant. The smoothness on a compact domain implies a uniform Lipschitz constant: for any elementary gate ˆW (θ),

ˆW (θ) − ˆW (θ′) ∞

≤ L0 ∥θ − θ′∥2 , (A2) where L0 depends only on the elementary gate family.  

> 2. Lipschitz control for a fixed layout

Let ˆUℓ(θ) and ˆUℓ(θ′) be two circuits with the same layout. By taking operator norms and using unitary invariance of the norm, we have 

ˆUℓ(θ) − ˆUℓ(θ′) ∞

≤

> qG

X

> a=1

ˆWa(θa) − ˆWa(θ′

> a

) ∞

≤ L0

> qG

X

> a=1

∥θa − θ′

> a

∥2 . (A3) Thus, the circuit-to-unitary map is Lipschitz with constant O(G) in the product parameter metric as follows directly from the telescoping bound in Eq. (A3). Now discretize each real parameter with mesh width 

∆ = η

4L0qG √s . (A4) If every component of every parameter vector is rounded to the nearest grid point, then ∥θa − θ′

> a

∥2 ≤ √s∆ for each a, and Eq. (A3) implies 

ˆUℓ(θ) − ˆUℓ(θ′) ∞

≤ L0qG √s∆ = η

4 . (A5) The particular factor 4 has no significance; it leaves room for harmless changes in constants when converting from unitaries to states. For pure states, operator-norm closeness of preparation unitaries implies trace-distance closeness of output states. Let 

|ψ⟩ = ˆU |0n⟩ , |ϕ⟩ = ˆV |0n⟩ . (A6) Then, 

D |ψ⟩⟨ ψ| , |ϕ⟩⟨ ϕ| = p1 − | ⟨ ψ|ϕ⟩ | 2 ≤ |ψ⟩ − eiα |ϕ⟩ 2 ≤ ˆU − eiα ˆV ∞

(A7) for a suitable phase eiα . Dropping the phase can only change constants. Therefore, a unitary O(η)-net for a fixed layout gives an 

O(η)-net for the corresponding set of output pure states. Renormalizing η by a universal constant gives a trace-distance η-net.  

> 3. Counting parameter grid points

For one elementary parameter vector, compactness of the parameter domain and the mesh width in Eq. (A4) imply at most 

(C/ ∆) s grid points. For all qG elementary factors in a fixed layout, the number of grid points is bounded by 

 C

∆

sqG 

≤

 C′Gη

s′G

, (A8) where C′ and s′ absorb L0, q, s and the constant diameter of the parameter domain. Taking logarithms yields 

log Nparam (η; ℓ) ≤ C1G log 

 C2Gη



. (A9) This is the continuous-parameter contribution. It is linear in G because there are O(G) parameter blocks, and it contains the factor log( G/η ) because each block must be specified to finite precision O(η/G ).16  

> 4. Counting layouts

The remaining contribution is discrete. In an all-to-all architecture, the two-qubit support of each counted gate can be chosen in at most  n

> 2

 ≤ n2/2 ways. Additional discrete choices, such as selecting a gate type from a constant-size library or choosing a location in a fixed finite pattern, contribute only a constant factor per gate. Hence, the number of layouts satisfies 

Nlayout (n, G ) ≤ (C3n2)G, log Nlayout (n, G ) ≤ C4G log( C5n). (A10) Multiplying the number of layouts by the number of grid points for each layout and using 0 < η < 1/2 gives 

log N (Sn,G , D, η ) ≤ C1G log 

 C2Gη



+ C4G log ( C5n)

≤ Cent G log 

 Carch nG η



, (A11) which is Eq. (6). If the layout is fixed in advance, or if the architecture has only a constant number of possible layouts at each depth, then Eq. (A10) is removed and one obtains the simplified form 

log N (Sn,G , D, η ) ≤ Cent G log 

 Cent Gη



. (A12) This proves Lemma 1. The proof also explains the operational meaning of the entropy bound. A circuit with real parameters is not an infinite-capacity statistical object at a fixed accuracy. At trace-distance resolution η, two parameter choices inside the same mesh cell are statistically interchangeable for the purpose of global state learning, because their output states differ by at most O(η). The finite number of cells is precisely the Occam description length used in the sample-complexity bounds. 

> Appendix B: From finite hypothesis selection to the agnostic Occam bound

This appendix expands the proof of Lemma 2, Theorem 2, and the lower-bound discussion. The main point is that a finite set of candidate quantum states can be searched with a statistical cost proportional to the logarithm of the number of candidates. After the continuous circuit class is replaced by a trace-distance net, the logarithm of the net size becomes the Occam penalty.  

> 1. Finite agnostic selection

Let H = {ˆσ1, . . . , ˆσK } be a finite set and let ˆρ be arbitrary. Define 

ai := D(ˆ ρ, ˆσi), a∗ := min  

> 1≤i≤K

ai. (B1) For a pair (i, j ), let ˆPij be the Helstrom effect, namely the projector onto the positive part of ˆσi − ˆσj [25]; more generally, one may take any effect attaining the trace norm. Then, 

Tr ˆPij (ˆ σi − ˆσj ) = D(ˆ σi, ˆσj ). (B2) For any effect ˆE, the trace distance dominates the distinguishability induced by ˆE:

Tr ˆE(ˆ ρ − ˆσ) ≤ D(ˆ ρ, ˆσ). (B3) Consequently, if candidate i is close to ˆρ and candidate j is much farther away, then the Helstrom comparison between i and j

has a detectable bias. Indeed, set 

pρ = Tr ˆPij ˆρ, pi = Tr ˆPij ˆσi, pj = Tr ˆPij ˆσj . (B4) Eq. (B3) gives pρ − pi ≤ ai. On the other hand, using Eq. (B2) and the triangle inequality, 

pρ − pj ≥ pi − pj − pρ − pi

= D(ˆ σi, ˆσj ) − pρ − pi

≥ D(ˆ ρ, ˆσj ) − D(ˆ ρ, ˆσi) − ai

= aj − 2ai. (B5) 17 Therefore, if aj ≥ 3ai + 4 γ, then 

pρ − pj ≥ ai + 4 γ ≥ pρ − pi + 4 γ. (B6) An estimate of pρ to additive accuracy γ is enough to prefer i over j by a robust margin. This is the basic geometric reason why a tournament based on Helstrom comparisons can eliminate candidates that are much farther from ˆρ than the best candidate. If a single binary comparison is repeated on m independent copies, Hoeffding’s inequality gives [26] 

Pr  epρ − pρ > γ  ≤ 2 exp( −2mγ 2). (B7) A direct implementation that estimates all K2 pairwise probabilities would be wasteful. The finite-state quantum selection procedures used in Refs. [2, 17] implement the same tournament logic through optimized collective measurements and threshold searches, so that the required number of copies scales as 

M ≥ Cγ2



log K + log 1

δ



, (B8) not as a polynomial in K. On the event that all comparisons required by the selection primitive are reliable, every candidate with distance larger than a fixed constant times a∗ + γ loses to a near-best candidate. The output ˆσ therefore satisfies 

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσ) ≤ ca ∗ + C′γ = c inf  

> ˆσ∈H

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσ) + C′γ. (B9) Renaming C′γ as ε gives Lemma 2. The constants are not important for the main results; only the dependence on log K,

log(1 /δ ), and 1/ε 2 is used. It is sometimes useful to state a weighted version. If the candidates carry weights wi > 0 with P 

> i

wi ≤ 1, the same argument with a weighted union bound gives confidence radius 

ri(M, δ ) := C

r log(1 /w i) + log(1 /δ )

M (B10) up to universal constants, and an output satisfying 

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσ) ≤ C0 inf  

> i

[D(ˆ ρ, ˆσi) + ri(M, δ )] . (B11) This weighted form is the most convenient way to prove the adaptive theorem in Appendix C.  

> 2. Reduction from a circuit class to a finite class

We now pass from a continuous circuit class to a finite net. Fix G and an additive accuracy parameter ε. Let H be an (ε/ 8) -net of Sn,G in trace distance with the net points chosen inside Sn,G . Lemma 1 gives 

log H ≤ Cent G log 

 Carch nG ε



. (B12) Let ˆσ⋆G ∈ S n,G be an almost optimal approximant, so that for arbitrary ξ > 0,

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσ⋆G) ≤ dG(ˆ ρ) + ξ. (B13) By the net property, there exists ˆηG ∈ H with 

D(ˆ σ⋆G, ˆηG) ≤ ε/ 8. (B14) The triangle inequality gives 

D(ˆ ρ, ˆηG) ≤ D(ˆ ρ, ˆσ⋆G) + D(ˆ σ⋆G, ˆηG) ≤ dG(ˆ ρ) + ξ + ε/ 8. (B15) Thus, the best finite-net error is no larger than the best circuit-class error plus the net radius. Applying Lemma 2 to H with additive accuracy proportional to ε gives, with probability at least 1 − δ,

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσG) ≤ c inf  

> ˆη∈H

D(ˆ ρ, ˆη) + C′ε

≤ cd G(ˆ ρ) + cξ + C′′ ε. (B16) 18 Since ξ > 0 was arbitrary, it can be removed. Absorbing constants into C0 and the additive accuracy gives Eq. (14). The copy condition is exactly Eq. (13), because Eq. (B8) uses log H and Eq. (B12) bounds this logarithm by the circuit entropy. For the learning-curve form, set r = rG(M, δ ) to be the smallest positive number satisfying 

M r 2 ≥ C



log N (Sn,G , D, r/ 16) + log 1

δ



. (B17) Repeating the preceding argument with an r/ 16 -net gives 

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσG) ≤ C0 [dG(ˆ ρ) + rG(M, δ )] . (B18) Substituting Lemma 1 into Eq. (B17) yields 

rG(M, δ ) = eO

r G + log(1 /δ )

M

!

, (B19) which is Eq. (15).  

> 3. Realizable lower bound and consistency with bounded-complexity learning

The lower bound used in Corollary 2 follows because the agnostic problem contains the realizable one. If ˆρ ∈ S n,G , then 

dG(ˆ ρ) = 0 . Any agnostic learner that guarantees trace-distance error at most ε must therefore learn the realizable class Sn,G to the same accuracy. The standard packing argument has three steps. First, construct a finite subset P ⊂ S n,G , such that 

D(ˆ σ, ˆσ′) ≥ 2ε for all distinct ˆσ, ˆσ′ ∈ P , log P ≥ c min {2n, G }. (B20) In the circuit-limited regime G ≪ 2n, this can be understood by taking k qubits with 2k ≍ G, preparing a large packing of 

k-qubit pure states, and tensoring the remaining n − k qubits with |0⟩. Generic k-qubit pure states can be synthesized to fixed accuracy using O(2 k) two-qubit gates, so the packing lies inside a G-gate class after adjusting constants. When G exceeds the pure-state dimension scale, the packing size saturates at order 2n.Second, suppose a learner outputs ˆρ with D(ˆ ρ, ˆσx) ≤ ε/ 2 for every packing element ˆσx. Because the packing points are separated by 2ε, a minimum-distance decoder can identify the index x from ˆρ with constant success probability. Thus, learning the state is at least as hard as transmitting the packing index through the quantum experiment. Third, Fano’s inequality converts successful index recovery into an information requirement. If X is uniform on the packing and the measurement transcript is Y , then reliable decoding requires 

I(X; Y ) ≥ c′ log P . (B21) Holevo’s bound limits I(X; Y ) by the Holevo information of the ensemble of M copies [27]. For a local packing at trace-distance scale ε, the Holevo information per copy is O(ε2) in the standard construction, so 

I(X; Y ) ≤ C′M ε 2. (B22) Combining Eqs. (B20)–(B22) gives 

M ≥ c′′ min {2n, G }

ε2 . (B23) This is the lower-bound scale in Theorem 1 and Corollary 2. The same linear-in-G realizable scale was also obtained in a related bounded-complexity learning setting in Ref. [1]. In the present study, the role of that reference is to confirm that the scale derived above agrees with the existing bounded-complexity learning picture. The logical flow here does not require taking Ref. [1] as an assumption: the Occam argument first derives the metric-entropy upper bound and the packing lower bound, and the external result is then cited as a consistency check on the realizable benchmark. 

> Appendix C: Adaptive model selection

This appendix gives a more explicit proof of Theorem 3. The fixed-G theorem says that one can compete with the best state in a single circuit class. The adaptive theorem tells us that one can compete with the best level in a hierarchy without knowing that level in advance. The only additional ingredient is a weighted union bound, or equivalently, an Occam code length for the model level. 19  

> 1. Weighted union of finite nets

For each level j, let Hj be an rj /16 -net of Sn,G j in trace distance. Let 

Kj := Hj , Lj := log Kj . (C1) Assign level weight πj > 0 with PJj=0 πj ≤ 1. A candidate ˆη ∈ H j receives the weight 

w(ˆ η) := πj

Kj

. (C2) If the same state appears in more than one net, we assign it to the smallest level containing it; this can only reduce the total weight. Then, 

X

> ˆη∈H all

w(ˆ η) ≤

> J

X

> j=0

πj ≤ 1. (C3) The weighted finite-selection bound, Eq. (B11), gives a learner such that, with probability at least 1 − δ,

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσ) ≤ C0 inf 

> ˆη∈H all

"

D(ˆ ρ, ˆη) + 

r log(1 /w (ˆ η)) + log(1 /δ )

M

#

. (C4) For ˆη ∈ H j ,

log 1

w(ˆ η) = Lj + log 1

πj

. (C5) Therefore, the penalty at level j is governed by Lj + log(1 /π j ) + log(1 /δ ).The implicit definition of rj (M, δ ) in Eq. (29) is exactly the fixed-point version of this penalty: 

M r 2 

> j

≥ C



log N (Sn,G j , D, r j /16) + log 1

πj δ



. (C6) Since Hj is an rj /16 -net, Lj ≤ log N (Sn,G j , D, r j /16) , and the square-root penalty in Eq. (C4) is at most a universal constant times rj . 

> 2. Comparison with the best level

Fix any level j. Let ˆσ⋆j ∈ S n,G j satisfy 

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσ⋆j ) ≤ dGj (ˆ ρ) + ξ (C7) for arbitrary ξ > 0. Because Hj is an rj /16 -net, there exists ˆηj ∈ H j , such that 

D(ˆ σ⋆j , ˆηj ) ≤ rj /16 . (C8) The triangle inequality gives 

D(ˆ ρ, ˆηj ) ≤ dGj (ˆ ρ) + ξ + rj /16 . (C9) Substituting this particular ˆηj into Eq. (C4) yields 

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσ) ≤ C1

dGj (ˆ ρ) + ξ + rj (M, δ ) . (C10) Since this holds for every level j and every ξ > 0, taking the infimum over j and sending ξ down to 0 gives 

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσ) ≤ C1 inf 

> 0≤j≤J

dGj (ˆ ρ) + rj (M, δ ) , (C11) which is Eq. (31). This proof also clarifies why the adaptive procedure does not overfit merely by taking the union of many nets. A candidate from a large class has a smaller code weight w(ˆ η), hence a larger value of log(1 /w (ˆ η)) . It must therefore improve the fit to ˆρ by more than its additional radius before it can beat a simpler candidate. This is the mathematical content of the Occam penalty. 20  

> 3. Evaluating the radius

Using Lemma 1 in Eq. (C6) gives 

M r 2 

> j

≥ C



Cent Gj log 

 16 Carch nG j

rj



+ log 1

πj δ



. (C12) Solving this fixed point up to logarithmic factors gives 

rj (M, δ ) = eO

r Gj + log(1 /π j δ)

M

!

, (C13) which is Eq. (30). For the common choice πj = c/ (j + 1) 2, the additional term is 

log 1

πj δ = O(log( j + 1) + log(1 /δ )) . (C14) This is logarithmic in the model level and is negligible compared with the leading Gj term in the regimes where the circuit entropy is large. Finally, a dyadic hierarchy converts the infimum over j into an infimum over all G ≤ Gmax up to constants. For any integer 

G with G0 ≤ G ≤ Gmax , choose j such that 

G ≤ Gj ≤ 2G. (C15) Because the classes are nested, dGj (ˆ ρ) ≤ dG(ˆ ρ). The radius at level Gj is at most a constant-factor version of the radius at G,up to logarithmic factors. Hence Eq. (C11) implies 

D(ˆ ρ, ˆσ) ≤ C0 inf 

> G≤Gmax

"

dG(ˆ ρ) + eO

r G + log(1 /δ )

M

!# 

, (C16) which is Eq. (32).  

> 4. Interpretation of the selected level

The proof does not require the learner to estimate dG(ˆ ρ) explicitly. The approximation curve appears only in the oracle comparison. Operationally, the learner compares candidates from all levels using a common penalized scale. If a deeper class reduces the distance to ˆρ by less than its increase in rj , it is not selected by the oracle bound. If it reduces the distance by more than the penalty, the adaptive guarantee allows the learner to move to that deeper class. Thus, the theorem implements the rule 

“use additional expressibility only when it is supported by samples.” (C17) This is the formal adaptive version of the sample-supported expressibility principle used in the main text. 

> Appendix D: Numerical illustrations

This appendix explains the purpose, methodology, and interpretation of the numerical illustrations. The plots are not used as assumptions in any theorem. They are deterministic visualizations of the two scales that appear in the theory: the approximation-estimation objective 

ΦM (G; ˆ ρ) = dG(ˆ ρ) + statistical radius ≃ dG(ˆ ρ) + pG/M , (D1) and the sample-supported boundary 

Gsupported (M, ε ; n) = min {2n, M ε 2}. (D2) All logarithmic factors and architecture-dependent constants are suppressed in the plots. The first numerical goal is to show why the adaptive oracle inequality has a finite optimal circuit scale. The approximation error dG(ˆ ρ) is nonincreasing in G, while the statistical radius grows like pG/M for fixed M . Their sum can therefore have a 21               

> FIG. 1. Illustrative approximation-estimation tradeoff for M= 5 .0×10 4. The dashed curves are stylized approximation errors dG, the solid curves add the statistical radius pG/M , and the dotted vertical line marks M ε 2= 2 .0×10 3for ε= 0 .20 .

minimum at an intermediate G. This minimum is the statistically justified ansatz size for the given sample budget, not necessarily the largest circuit size that can be implemented on hardware. The second numerical goal is to visualize the law Gsupported ≃ M ε 2. This boundary is obtained by requiring the statistical radius to be no larger than the target accuracy: 

pG/M ≲ ε ⇐⇒ G ≲ M ε 2. (D3) For very large G, the circuit class cannot exceed the effective dimension of the pure-state manifold, so the boundary saturates at 

2n.Fig. 1 uses stylized approximation curves rather than data from a specific quantum device. This is intentional: the purpose is to illustrate how different possible approximation profiles interact with the same Occam penalty. The script chooses a logarithmic grid of gate budgets G and evaluates two monotone decreasing proxy curves, 

dexp  

> G

= dexp floor + Aexp exp[ −(G/G exp )αexp ],dpoly  

> G

= dpoly floor + Apoly (1 + G/G poly )−β . (D4) The constants are chosen only to make both regimes visible on the same axes. The exponential proxy represents a source for which additional circuit depth quickly captures the relevant structure until a floor is reached. The polynomial proxy represents a source for which approximation improves more gradually with depth. For each proxy curve, the plotted Occam objective is 

ΦνM (G) = dνG + λpG/M , ν ∈ { exp , poly }, (D5) with λ = 1 in the displayed figure. Changing λ would shift the precise minimizer but not the qualitative conclusion. Here, the sample budget is M = 5 .0 × 10 4, and the vertical dotted line is the supported scale for ε = 0 .20 : hence, 

M ε 2 = 2 .0 × 10 3. (D6) The behavior in Fig. 1 should be read as follows. At small G, both solid curves are dominated by approximation error. Increasing G is beneficial because the ansatz is under-expressive. At intermediate G, the approximation error and statistical radius are comparable. This is the useful model-selection region: the data can justify increasing the ansatz only if the decrease in dG is larger than the increase in pG/M . At large G, the dashed approximation curves continue to decrease or flatten, but the solid Occam objectives rise because the statistical penalty grows. The additional expressibility is then not supported by the available copies for a global trace-distance guarantee. The exponential and polynomial examples differ in where their minima occur. The exponential proxy drops quickly, so the best objective is obtained soon after the approximation error reaches its floor. The polynomial proxy improves more slowly, so it can justify a larger circuit budget before the statistical penalty dominates. This illustrates the role of the unknown approximation 22       

> FIG. 2. Sample-supported expressibility boundary for n= 20 . The curves show Gsupported = min {2n, M ε 2}for several target accuracies, ignoring logarithmic factors. The horizontal dotted line is the tomography saturation 220 .

curve G 7 → dG(ˆ ρ) in Theorem 3. The theorem does not assume either of these shapes; it states that the adaptive learner competes with whichever tradeoff is best for the actual source. Fig. 2 evaluates Eq. (D2) directly. Here, the number of qubits is fixed at 

n = 20 , 2n = 1 ,048 ,576 , (D7) and the sample budget M is varied over a logarithmic grid. The target accuracies shown are 

ε ∈ { 0.05 , 0.10 , 0.20 , 0.30 }. (D8) For each pair (M, ε ), the script computes M ε 2 and then takes the minimum with 2n.The log-log plot has two simple regimes. Below the horizontal plateau, each curve has slope one because 

log Gsupported = log M + 2 log ε. (D9) Thus, increasing the number of copies by a factor of ten increases the statistically supported gate budget by a factor of ten at fixed accuracy. Increasing the target accuracy from ε = 0 .10 to ε = 0 .20 shifts the curve upward by a factor of four, because the boundary depends on ε2.The plateau begins when M ε 2 reaches 2n. The saturation sample size is 

Msat (n, ε ) = 2n

ε2 . (D10) For n = 20 , this gives approximately 

ε Msat (20 , ε )0.05 4.19 × 10 8

0.10 1.05 × 10 8

0.20 2.62 × 10 7

0.30 1.17 × 10 7

(D11) This explains the figure: the larger-accuracy curves reach the 220 plateau earlier, while the smaller-accuracy curves continue to grow linearly over most of the displayed range. Fig. 1 tells us that increasing expressibility has two effects with opposite signs. It can reduce approximation error, but it also increases the number of statistically distinguishable hypotheses. The lesson of Fig. 2 is that the supported gate budget is linear 23 in M ε 2 until the tomography saturation is reached. These conclusions are precisely the qualitative content of Theorem 3 and Corollary 3 [28]. 

[1] H.-Y. Zhao, L. Lewis, I. Kannan, Y. Quek, H.-Y. Huang, and M. C. Caro, PRX Quantum 5, 040306 (2024). [2] J. Haah, A. W. Harrow, Z. Ji, X. Wu, and N. Yu, in Proceedings of the Forty-Eighth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing 

(Association for Computing Machinery, 2016) pp. 913–925. [3] R. O’Donnell and J. Wright, in Proceedings of the Forty-Eighth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (Association for Computing Machinery, 2016) pp. 899–912. [4] V. N. Vapnik, Statistical Learning Theory (Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1998). [5] J. Rissanen, Automatica 14 , 465 (1978). [6] A. Barron, J. Rissanen, and B. Yu, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 44 , 2743 (1998). [7] J. Biamonte, P. Wittek, N. Pancotti, P. Rebentrost, N. Wiebe, and S. Lloyd, Nature 549 , 195 (2017). [8] M. Cerezo, A. Arrasmith, R. Babbush, S. C. Benjamin, S. Endo, K. Fujii, J. R. McClean, K. Mitarai, X. Yuan, L. Cincio, and P. J. Coles, Nature Reviews Physics 3, 625 (2021). [9] M. Schuld and F. Petruccione, Machine Learning with Quantum Computers , 2nd ed. (Springer, Cham, 2021). [10] M. Benedetti, E. Lloyd, S. Sack, and M. Fiorentini, Quantum Science and Technology 4, 043001 (2019). [11] J. R. McClean, S. Boixo, V. N. Smelyanskiy, R. Babbush, and H. Neven, Nature Communications 9, 4812 (2018). [12] S. Sim, P. D. Johnson, and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Advanced Quantum Technologies 2, 1900070 (2019). [13] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, Quantum Computation and Quantum Information , 10th ed. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2010). [14] A. Barenco, C. H. Bennett, R. Cleve, D. P. DiVincenzo, N. Margolus, P. Shor, T. Sleator, J. A. Smolin, and H. Weinfurter, Physical Review A 52 , 3457 (1995). [15] M. Plesch and ˇ C. Brukner, Physical Review A 83 , 032302 (2011). [16] A. Blumer, A. Ehrenfeucht, D. Haussler, and M. K. Warmuth, Information Processing Letters 24 , 377 (1987). [17] C. Badescu and R. O’Donnell, in Proceedings of the 53rd Annual ACM SIGACT Symposium on Theory of Computing (Association for Computing Machinery, 2021) pp. 1398–1411. [18] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory , 2nd ed. (Wiley-Interscience, Hoboken, NJ, 2006). [19] M. Belkin, D. Hsu, S. Ma, and S. Mandal, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116 , 15849 (2019). [20] J. Bang, K. Cho, and J. Jae, arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.12651 (2026). [21] T. Cai, D. Kim, Y. Wang, M. Yuan, and H. H. Zhou, The Annals of Statistics 44 , 682 (2016). [22] H.-Y. Huang, R. Kueng, and J. Preskill, Nature Physics 16 , 1050 (2020). [23] C. Bertoni, J. Haferkamp, M. Hinsche, M. Ioannou, J. Eisert, and H. Pashayan, Physical Review Letters 133 , 020602 (2024). [24] A. A. Akhtar, H.-Y. Hu, and Y.-Z. You, Quantum 7, 1026 (2023). [25] C. W. Helstrom, Quantum Detection and Estimation Theory (Academic Press, New York, 1976). [26] W. Hoeffding, Journal of the American Statistical Association 58 , 13 (1963). [27] A. S. Holevo, Problems of Information Transmission 9, 177 (1973). [28] Logarithmic factors are deliberately suppressed in both plots, i.e., G −→ G log 

 Carch nG ε



. It would slightly lower the supported gate budget for fixed M and ε. However, the leading message is unchanged.