Title: Krylov-Lie Algebras for Variational Quantum Algorithms: Geometric, Depth-Aware Insights into Expressivity and Trainability

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.02626v2

Published Time: Wed, 08 Jul 2026 00:37:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 144

Markdown Content:
# Krylov-Lie Algebras for Variational Quantum Algorithms: Geometric, Depth-Aware Insights into Expressivity and Trainability 

## Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace Mathematics and Statistics Texas Tech University June 2026 A thesis submitted to the graduate faculty of Texas Tech University in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of MASTER OF SCIENCE Approved Dmitri Pavlov, Ph.D. 

## Chair of Committee 

## Lucas T. Braydwood, Ph.D. Travis Thompson, Ph.D. Mark Sheridan 

## Dean of the Graduate School arXiv:2607.02626v2 [quant-ph] 7 Jul 2026 Copyright 2026, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

## ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This thesis would have been entirely impossible without the assistance of so many in my life, and so it would be incomplete without appropriate acknowledgments. Throughout all the trials and tribulations, Mom and Dad, you have been there for me, and when I needed it most, you came to help. Thank you. I would particularly like to thank my advisor, Dmitri Pavlov, for his assistance in the process of writing this thesis and for his especially shrewd insights into how I should frame my work. I do not believe I would have been even as close to being as satisfied with the outcome of this text without his feedback. Dmitri, you have been a great advisor, and thank you for trusting in my ability to do this. To all those who never doubted me for a moment—Cole, Enzel, Galilea, Evelyn, Amaris— your presence and friendship are invaluable to me, and I hope I get to keep you all around as long as I can. Life would not mean as much without you. James, talking math with you is a joy. I do not know anyone else with whom I can speak about research so fluently. I long for the next opportunity I have to hear what you are doing, to tell you what has piqued my interest. You are a wonderful friend, and a great colleague. I also must give special thanks to my committee members, Lucas T. Braydwood and Travis Thompson. Besides being wonderful, incredibly supportive people, they very much saved the defense of this thesis from the horrors of bureaucracy. I cannot thank either of you enough for everything you have done for me over the past several years. Finally, I would like to thank Michael Ragone and Marco Cerezo for their enlightening correspondence on the dynamical Lie algebraic theory of VQA loss landscapes. ii Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

# Table of Contents 

Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ii Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v1 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

1.1 Variational Quantum Algorithms and Barren Plateaus . . . . . . . . . . . . 11.2 Limitations of Existing Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21.2.1 The Assumption Gap: Haar Randomness and t-Designs . . . . . . . . 21.2.2 The Insufficiency of ε-Approximate t-Designs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31.2.3 Problematic Empirics: Cragged Terrains Versus Barren Plateaus . . . 41.3 Thesis Contributions and Approach . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4

2 Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

2.1 Generators, Reachable Manifolds, and the Dynamical Lie Algebra . . . . . . 72.2 The Dynamical Lie Algebraic Theory of Barren Plateaus . . . . . . . . . . . 12 2.3 Brief Aside on Jordan-Algebraic Wishart Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 

3 Krylov-Lie Algebras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 

3.1 Motivation from Measure Theory and Krylov Subspaces . . . . . . . . . . . . 17 3.2 Construction of Krylov and Krylov-Lie Algebras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 3.2.1 Krylov Algebras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 3.2.2 Krylov-Lie Algebras . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 3.3 Structural Results on Krylov-Lie Algebras and Groups . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 3.4 Dimension-Matching and Seed Dependence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 

4 Approximation of the Reachable Manifold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 

4.1 Preparatory Lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39 4.2 The Krylov-Lie Approximation Theorem and Related Results . . . . . . . . 45 4.2.1 Krylov–Lie Error Bounds from Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff . . . . . . 57 4.2.2 Commutator Budget and Krylov–Lie Approximation Quality . . . . . 67 4.3 Concentration of Measure for Krylov–Lie Approximators . . . . . . . . . . . 71 iii 5 Applications to VQA Landscape Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79 

5.1 Moment Formulas for Krylov-Lie Approximators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79 5.1.1 Expectation Value of the Loss under a Weighted Sampling Measure . 79 5.1.2 A Weighted Variance Formula Compatible with Haar Distributions . 83 5.2 Deviation from Haar and Variance Bounds on the Krylov-Lie Group . . . . . 87 5.2.1 Comparison with Ragone et al. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93 5.3 Variance Inequalities, Non-Haar Asymptotics, and the Failure of Lemma 6 . 93 

6 An Observable Kawada–Itˆ o Theorem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97 

6.1 Implications and Interpretation of Observable Kawada-Itˆ o . . . . . . . . . . 110 

7 Discussion of Limitations and Possible Extensions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114 

7.1 The Need for Jordan Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 114 7.2 Open Problems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 116 

Bibliography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 119 A Central-character obstructions to unit eigenvalues in cycle-graph QAOA 122 B Observable quotient formalism and auxiliary proofs . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130 

B.0.1 A is already an algebra . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 130 B.0.2 Observable Stone–Weierstrass and Peter–Weyl . . . . . . . . . . . . . 131 B.0.3 Unit-modulus eigenvalues of Fourier coefficients . . . . . . . . . . . . 134 B.0.4 Proof of i.i.d. QAOA convergence to Haar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

## ABSTRACT 

Variational quantum algorithms (VQAs) are a promising method for potentially realizing quantum advantage on the noisy intermediate-scale quantum hardware of today by lever-aging methodological wisdom from classical machine learning and optimization. However, their utility is impeded by features such as barren plateaus and other nontrivial pathologies in their loss landscapes. Much work has therefore focused on improving our understand-ing of VQA landscapes, leading to the development of dynamical Lie algebraic theories of barren plateaus and Jordan-algebraic Wishart systems. Though valuable and foundational, these models typically employ the assumptions of ϵ-approximate t-designs and Haar-random circuits, thereby neglecting the depth and geometric content of realistic variational ans¨ atze. This makes such approaches poorly suited to the shallow-depth regime, where VQAs are known to be poor approximators of 2-designs and where trainability is often most practi-cally relevant. To address these limitations of existing VQA landscape theory, this thesis introduces a novel framework centered around Krylov algebras : algebraic structures induced by the Krylov span of a finite generator set acting on one or more seed vectors. We show that the reachable manifolds to which VQAs give rise can be well-approximated in a numerically robust and geometrically faithful fashion through the use of Krylov-Lie algebras and groups. Furthermore, we demonstrate that these structures induce the canonical invariant measures necessary for computing expectation values and variances of loss functions under general sampling measures. In particular, we derive weighted non-Haar variance formulas that re-cover the usual Lie-algebraic Haar formulas as a special case while isolating all non-Haar effects into explicit correction terms. We also refine the common heuristic that sufficiently deep depth-L circuit ensembles must converge to Haar by showing that this conclusion does not hold in full generality with-out additional hypotheses. In the process, we identify concrete obstructions to naive Haar convergence; nevertheless, we find that this convergence may be recovered under natural nec-essary and sufficient ergodic conditions. Finally, our variance formulas reveal that non-Haar contributions can furnish a possible mechanism for mitigating barren plateaus by reweight-ing the visible sectors of the landscape, suggesting that VQAs may be more trainable than recent barren plateau literature has posited. vTexas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

## CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION 1.1 Variational Quantum Algorithms and Barren Plateaus 

Variational quantum algorithms (VQAs), such as the quantum approximate optimization algorithm (QAOA), have emerged as promising approaches to realizing quantum compu-tational advantage [10]. They avoid implementing a long, fully error-corrected quantum computation, instead working with a parameterized quantum circuit, evaluating a loss func-tion on the output, and updating the parameters through a classical optimization loop. In this way, VQAs combine the expressive power of quantum dynamics with the flexibility of modern optimization, and they have therefore become central to proposals for near-term quantum advantage in simulation, optimization, and machine learning [29]. Simultaneously, the practical promise of VQAs has been shadowed by a substantial and rapidly growing theory of trainability obstructions. The most famous of these are bar-ren plateaus : regimes in which gradients or cost function variances (these are equivalent conditions; [29, 37]) become exponentially small in the system size, rendering training pro-hibitively expensive since such training landscapes necessitate an exponential number of measurements to reliably determine a parameter update direction [29]. Over the past sev-eral years, the study of barren plateaus has developed into a large and sophisticated liter-ature, with important contributions from concentration of measure, unitary design theory, dynamical Lie algebras, and more recently Jordan-algebraic approaches to loss-landscape statistics [2, 10, 29, 37]. This body of work has been valuable, and many of its theorems are mathematically elegant. Nevertheless, a central contention of this thesis is that much of the existing theory has been developed around asymptotic randomization principles that are poorly matched to the finite-depth, highly structured variational circuits that are most relevant in practice. A variational quantum algorithm is specified by a parameterized family of unitaries 

U (θ) = e−iθ LHL · · · e−iθ 1H1 ,

together with a set of Hermitian circuit generators S = {H1, . . . , H L} that do not necessarily have to be distinct, an initial state |ψ⟩, an observable O, and a classical rule (e.g. gradient descent) for updating the circuit parameters θ. The number of terms in the product of 1Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

parameterized unitaries is called the depth or number of layers , and typically, the function to be optimized is the loss (or cost) function of the form [37]: 

ℓθ(ρ, O ) = Tr U (θ)ρU (θ†O. (1.1) The set of all unitaries that can be obtained from the parameterized circuit via some choice of parameters, or the reachable set of the ansatz, is hence a highly structured finite-dimensional manifold determined by the chosen generators, parameterization, depth, and architecture. Any convincing theory of VQA trainability should, therefore, be sensitive to that geometry. In hopes of making analysis tractable, much of the modern barren plateau literature instead proceeds by replacing this structured, finite-depth object with a more symmetric random model [2, 19, 37]. In many cases, one studies ensembles that are Haar-random, or close in a suitable sense to Haar-random, on some large compact Lie group associated with the ansatz. In other cases, one assumes or proves that the circuit behaves as an 

ε-approximate t-design, which can be thought of as ensembles whose integrals of t-degree polynomials of unitaries are within a tolerance ε of the corresponding integrals over the Haar measure, and then imports the corresponding Haar moment identities [2, 37]. These ideas have been extremely fruitful, especially for deriving clean formulas for expectation values, variances, and concentration phenomena. And yet, they also build a substantial assumption gap between our mathematical models and the variational circuits we wish to analyze. 

## 1.2 Limitations of Existing Theory 

1.2.1 The Assumption Gap: Haar Randomness and t-Designs 

The first major limitation of existing VQA landscape theory is its dependence on Haar-randomness and unitary design heuristics. The Haar measure is the natural invariant mea-sure on a compact group, and from a purely representation-theoretic perspective, it is an extremely convenient object. Likewise, t-designs provide a powerful finite-moment surro-gate for Haar randomness. If a circuit ensemble forms an exact or sufficiently constrained approximate t-design, then one can often compute or bound the low-order moments of the loss function by appealing to universal formulas that depend only on the surrounding group representation. The problem is that realistic variational ans¨ atze are generally neither Haar-random nor close to Haar-random in the regimes that matter most for training [2, 23, 26, 35, 42]. In the shallow- to intermediate-depth setting, where one typically hopes to avoid concentration pathologies and retain useful optimization signal, the circuit manifold explored by the ansatz, 2Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

coupled with its assigned parameter distribution, is usually far too small and too structured to resemble Haar on any ambient group [23, 26, 35, 42]. Ansatz properties such as depth, locality, and generator choice all impose strong geometric restrictions on the accessible region of state space [26, 29, 35, 42]. When these features are suppressed in favor of a Haar surrogate, one risks proving theorems about an asymptotic random model rather than about the actual variational family. This mismatch is especially severe in Lie-algebraic approaches based on the full dynamical Lie algebra. The dynamical Lie algebra captures the infinitesimal closure of the generators, and it is an important asymptotic object as it can capture the full expressivity of the circuit [37]. However, the Lie group it integrates to may be exponentially larger than the manifold actually explored by a polynomial-depth ansatz, and consequently, formulas derived from the Haar measure on that full group can dramatically overstate the amount of effective mixing present at realistic depths [23, 35, 42]. This implies that the Lie algebraic viewpoint is incomplete unless it is coupled to a depth-aware description of the part of the Lie-theoretic structure actually visible to the circuit. 

1.2.2 The Insufficiency of ε-Approximate t-Designs 

Even when approximate design arguments are available, they are often too coarse to resolve the questions one most wants to ask about trainability. An ε-approximate t-design controls moments only up to order t, and it does so relative to a chosen ambient Haar model. This can be enough to transfer certain concentration estimates or moment formulas, but it does not identify which representation-theoretic sectors of the original sampling measure are still visible at finite depth, which sectors are being suppressed, or how the nonuniform sampling distribution induced by the ansatz differs from Haar on the region it actually explores [37]. Additionally, examining Equation 21 from Ragone et al., one quickly sees that in cases where the Schatten 1-norm of our observable is an increasing exponential in the number of qubits, something that is not uncommon in realistic ans¨ atze [13], then at shallow depths these bounds will be vacuous. For these reasons, constructs based around approximate designs are often better viewed as asymptotic diagnostics than as faithful finite-depth models [2]. Moreover, once one leaves the exact-Haar setting, the difference between the true ansatz measure and Haar should not be viewed solely as an error term to be discarded. It may itself contain the most important trainability information because the sampling distortion from Haar can amplify or suppress precisely those sectors of the landscape that govern optimization. Any realistic finite-depth theory must therefore replace the design heuristic with an object that approximates the reachable manifold itself rather than its asymptotic random limit. 3Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

1.2.3 Problematic Empirics: Cragged Terrains Versus Barren Plateaus 

The most serious challenge to the universality of current barren-plateau theory is empirical. Across a wide range of practically relevant shallow ans¨ atze, one does not consistently see the kind of exponentially vanishing optimization signal predicted by Haar-based arguments [13]. Instead, one often encounters highly nontrivial landscapes whose variances remain non-concentrated, and usually even grow polynomially with system size. These are not the nearly featureless surfaces suggested by a naive extrapolation of deep random-circuit theory. They are rough, structured, and often anisotropic landscapes, which in ongoing work are referred to as cragged terrains [13]. This empirical picture indicates that current theory has often been overextended beyond the regime in which it is mathematically justified. If the practically relevant shallow-depth regime overwhelmingly exhibits structured, non-Haar behavior, then a theory built around universal convergence to Haar cannot be taken as a default explanation of trainability. At best, it describes a limiting regime that may or may not be reached at useful depths. At worst, it obscures the very mechanisms that make real variational circuits trainable. This concern becomes more percipient after accounting for the results developed later in this thesis. Specifically, the correction of the common heuristic that increasing the circuit depth should generically force convergence to Haar, and therefore to a tighter approximate 

t-design, is not valid in full generality. The issue is structural: one can have visible sectors that fail to mix at all. In the framework of this thesis, those sectors appear explicitly as nontrivial Fourier components of the induced sampling law. In the cycle-graph QAOA, this leads to a concrete obstruction showing that a key contraction lemma used in the literature fails without additional hypotheses [37]. Thus, although we do find conditions that do allow us to conclude Haar convergence, the prevailing narrative that depth alone drives generic variational ensembles toward Haar must be treated with considerable care. Because of these impediments to the applicability of current theory, the community needs a finite-depth theory that keeps the Lie-theoretic and representation-theoretic insights of past literature while abandoning the assumption that realistic variational circuits are already well approximated by asymptotic randomness. The central idea of this work is that such a theory should begin from the geometry of the reachable manifold itself. 

## 1.3 Thesis Contributions and Approach 

This thesis proposes Krylov–Lie structures as a depth-aware replacement for purely Haar-centric models of variational quantum dynamics. The guiding idea is to combine the graded, seed-dependent flexibility of Krylov constructions with the noncommutative closure proper-4Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

ties of Lie theory. Starting from a finite generator set and one or more seed vectors, we build a finite-dimensional Krylov–Lie subspace by repeated commutator action up to a chosen depth, then compress the original generators to that subspace and take the Lie algebra they generate. The resulting Krylov–Lie algebra and its represented compact Lie group furnish a finite-depth Lie-theoretic surrogate for the reachable manifold of the original ansatz. The first advantage of this construction is geometric. Instead of comparing a shallow circuit to the full dynamical Lie group it would generate only asymptotically [37], one ap-proximates the manifold actually explored at the chosen depth by a compact Lie group of controlled dimension. This makes it possible to ask whether the ansatz admits a dimension-matched or dimension-reduced Lie-theoretic model, whether the induced comparison map has full rank almost everywhere, and whether the pushforward of the parameter law becomes absolutely continuous with respect to Haar measure on the approximating group. When this happens, one obtains a canonical Haar background together with a Radon–Nikodym den-sity recording the sampling distortion of the original circuit relative to the approximating geometry. The second advantage is structural. Krylov–Lie subspaces and algebras vary with the seed, and this flexibility creates a rich dimensional theory. One can ask which dimensions are attainable, when maximal dimension is generic, and under what conditions dimension matching with the reachable manifold can be achieved. A substantial portion of this thesis is devoted to answering these questions using determinantal stratifications, algebraic genericity arguments, and universal dimension bounds. These results show that the seed dependence of Krylov-Lie structures is a boon of the formalism: it supplies the tunable finite-dimensional geometry needed for realistic manifold approximation. The third advantage is quantitative. Beyond constructing Lie-theoretic surrogates, the thesis proves a finite-depth approximation theory for them. After establishing a compact, full-rank approximation theorem for reachable manifolds on regular loci, we show that the canonical comparison map admits a Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff expansion whose seed-level truncation error decays factorially in the commutator depth; the original circuit converges to its canonical Krylov–Lie proxy with a seed-based error of order Bk+1  

> C

/(k + 1)! on any compact subset. The fourth advantage is measure-theoretic. Once a compact represented Krylov–Lie group is obtained, it carries a canonical normalized Haar measure, and any sampling law in-duced by the original ansatz that is absolutely continuous with respect to that Haar measure may be expressed through a Radon–Nikodym density relative to it. This makes it possible to derive exact weighted expectation and variance formulas for loss functions under general non-Haar sampling. In the Haar case, these formulas reduce to the familiar Lie-algebraic 5Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

expressions. Away from Haar, all deviation is isolated into explicit correction operators gov-erned by the visible sectors of the density. In this sense, the framework identifies exactly where non-Haar behavior lives, rather than treating it as an undifferentiated error term. A further contribution is that the quantitative approximation theory is strong enough to transport observable information from the Krylov–Lie proxy back to the original circuit. For seed-dependent observables, the thesis proves that expectation values, variances, and con-centration inequalities for the original ansatz are controlled by the corresponding quantities for the Krylov–Lie surrogate up to the same factorially decaying Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff error. This yields a clean bridge between geometric concentration properties on Krylov–Lie groups and those of finite-depth variational quantum circuits. Finally, this thesis uses this framework to revisit the interpretation of barren plateaus at finite depth. The resulting theory clarifies how and when Haar-based variance formulas should still be understood as asymptotic limits, but it also shows that non-Haar effects are not peripheral. They may dominate the shallow-depth regime and can in principle mitigate variance concentration by reweighting the visible sectors of the landscape. Relatedly, this thesis corrects the common heuristic that increasing depth alone should generically force convergence to Haar: this is not true in full generality, because one may have sectors visible to our order of moment that fail to mix. We identify concrete obstructions to naive Haar convergence and then recover convergence under natural necessary and sufficient observable ergodic conditions, formulated through a Kawada–Itˆ o theorem for convergence of observables on unitary t-designs. The organization of the thesis is as follows. Chapter 2 recalls the minimal background on dynamical Lie algebras and existing VQA landscape theory needed for this work. Chapter 3 introduces Krylov algebras and Krylov-Lie algebras, establishes their basic structural prop-erties, and develops the seed-dependent dimension theory. Chapter 4 proves the main ap-proximation results, including the Krylov–Lie approximation theorem, the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff error bounds, and concentration transport for Krylov–Lie proxies. Chapter 5 applies this machinery to VQA landscape theory by deriving weighted moment and vari-ance formulas, comparing them with existing Haar-based results, and analyzing the failure of naive Haar-convergence heuristics. Chapter 6 finds necessary and sufficient conditions for convergence to the Haar measure of the dynamical Lie group of the L-fold convolution of a single-layer measure (in the sense of convergence in all orders of a unitary t-design over the dynamical Lie group). Chapter 7 concludes with limitations of the present framework and several directions for future work, including Jordan-Lie extensions, more detailed theory for the dimension of Krylov-Lie algebras, and the role of nonuniform sampling in trainability. 6Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

## CHAPTER 2 BACKGROUND 

This chapter introduces the algebraic frameworks that will be used as points of reference in our analysis of variational quantum algorithms throughout the thesis. Our focus is on how the operator family generated by a parametrized circuit encodes structural information about the reachable states, the effective observables, and the resulting optimization landscape. We review the aspects of this framework that are most relevant to expressivity, trainability, and barren plateau theory, with an emphasis on the quantities and constructions that will be used later in this thesis; we do not aim for this to be an entirely comprehensive introduction to barren plateau theory and empirics. For such an exposition, see Larocca et al. [29]. 

## 2.1 Generators, Reachable Manifolds, and the Dynamical Lie Al-gebra 

A variational quantum algorithm is specified by a parameterized circuit 

U (θ) = e−iθ LHL · · · e−iθ 1H1 ,

with Hermitian generators H1, . . . , H L acting on a finite-dimensional Hilbert space H ∼=(C2)⊗N (where N is the number of qubits), together with an input state ρ and a Hermitian observable O. As mentioned in Equation (1.1), the loss function is 

ℓθ(ρ, O ) := Tr U (θ)ρU (θ)†O.

For example, we have the Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA), fittingly introduced for approximate combinatorial optimization [1, 8, 13]. Given a cost Hamiltonian 

HC encoding the objective function and a mixer Hamiltonian HM driving noncommutativity between layers, the L-layer QAOA ansatz is 

|γ, β⟩ = e−iβ LHM e−iγ LHC · · · e−iβ 1HM e−iγ 1HC |ψ0⟩,

where |ψ0⟩ is typically an easily prepared reference state. Note that while one can in some sense consider QAOA to be given by a depth-2 L quantum circuit, it is most common to group 7Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

each mixer Hamiltonian gate with a cost Hamiltonian gate and consider those groupings as one layer each. The parameters ( γ, β) are chosen to optimize the expectation value of HC , so that measurement of the final state yields high-quality approximate solutions. Because of its simple alternating structure and direct connection between generators and circuit geometry, QAOA serves as a useful model for studying expressivity and trainability in variational quantum algorithms [1, 8, 13]. In VQA landscape theory, borrowing from quantum control [34], one is interested in the geometry of the reachable family (or reachable manifold) 

M := {U (θ) | θ ∈ Θ}, (2.1) where Θ is the set of all possible θ values with periodic structure quotiented out. M is also taken to have a probability distribution ν over its parameters. The goal of studying this reachable manifold is that it may permit us to classify barren plateaus. We now give a precise definition of this landscape phenomenon. 

Definition 2.1.1 (Barren plateau) . A barren plateau occurs when there exists a b > 1 such that Var ν (ℓθ(ρ, O )) ∈ O (1 /b N ), (2.2) where Var ν indicates a second-moment integral over the appropriate set of parameters and their distribution ν [19, 29, 37]. In much of the barren plateau literature, the finite-depth reachable set M is studied through a larger Lie theoretic object attached only to the circuit generators. 

Definition 2.1.2 (Dynamical Lie algebra) . Let S = {H1, . . . , H L} be the Hermitian gener-ators of the variational circuit. The dynamical Lie algebra (DLA) of the ansatz is the real Lie algebra 

g := ⟨iS⟩ Lie ⊆ u(2 N ),

namely the smallest real linear subspace of u(2 N ) containing iH 1, . . . , iH L and closed under the commutator bracket, where N is the number of qubits [19, 37]. The compact, connected Lie group integrating the DLA for a given representation is termed the dynamical Lie group ,or DLG. The importance of the DLA is that it captures the asymptotic controllability or expres-sivity of the circuit: every circuit unitary U (θ) lies in the connected Lie group generated by g

and its representation, and sufficiently rich compositions of the circuit generators can explore 8Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

that group. Since g is a Lie subalgebra of the compact Lie algebra u(2 N ), it is reductive [37], and hence admits a decomposition 

g = z ⊕ g1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ gk−1,

where g1, . . . , gk−1 are simple ideals and z is abelian; equivalently, z is the center and [ g, g] = 

g1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ gk−1 is semisimple. If G is any connected compact Lie-group realization integrating g, then the adjoint rep-resentation preserves this decomposition [28, §3.4 and §6.4], and one may project operators in the set of all endomorphisms on H, namely End( H), onto the corresponding ideals. This is the point of entry for the Lie algebraic variance formulas of Ragone et al.: the loss land-scape is decomposed into independent algebraic sectors, and its Haar moments are computed sector-by-sector with Schur’s lemma and the Weingarten calculus [37]. One might worry that the DLG construction omits global topological information like discrete lattice structure on the circuit by using the compact, connected Lie group given by the DLA representation. Fortunately, for the Haar averages relevant to the moments of the cost function, this loss is inessential. 

Proposition 2.1.3 (Pushforward of the Haar measure) . Let G′ and G be compact Hausdorff groups, and let q : G′ → G be a continuous surjective homomorphism. Moreover, have μG′

and μG denote the normalized Haar probability measures on G′ and G, respectively. Then 

q∗μG′ = μG.

Equivalently, for every bounded Borel function f : G → C,

Z

> G

f (g) dμ G(g) = 

Z

> G′

f (q(g′)) dμ G′ (g′).

Proof. Define a Borel probability measure ν on G by 

ν(E) := μG′

 q−1(E)

for every Borel set E ⊆ G. Since q is surjective, 

ν(G) = μG′

 q−1(G) = μG′ (G′) = 1 .

We claim that ν is left-translation invariant. Let g ∈ G, and choose g′ 

> 0

∈ G′ such that 9Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

q(g′

> 0

) = g, which is possible because q is surjective. Then for every Borel set E ⊆ G,

q−1(gE ) = q−1 q(g′

> 0

)E = g′ 

> 0

q−1(E).

Indeed, if x ∈ q−1(gE ), then q(x) = q(g′

> 0

)e for some e ∈ E, so q(( g′

> 0

)−1x) = e ∈ E, hence 

x ∈ g′

> 0

q−1(E). The reverse inclusion is immediate. Therefore, by left invariance of Haar measure on G′,

ν(gE ) = μG′

 q−1(gE ) = μG′

 g′

> 0

q−1(E) = μG′

 q−1(E) = ν(E).

Thus ν is a left-invariant probability measure on the compact group G. By uniqueness of the normalized Haar measure on compact groups, ν = μG. Hence q∗μG′ = μG.The integral identity follows from the defining property of pushforward measure: for every bounded Borel f : G → C,

Z

> G

f (g) d(q∗μG′ )( g) = 

Z

> H

f (q(g′)) dμ G′ (g′).

Since q∗μG′ = μG, this becomes 

Z

> G

f (g) dμ G(g) = 

Z

> G′

f (q(g′)) dμ G′ (g′).

Corollary 2.1.4 (Representation-invariant Haar averages of trace-class observables) . Let g

be a finite-dimensional real Lie algebra, let ρ : g → u(H) be a finite-dimensional unitary Lie-algebra representation, and let Π : eG → U (H) be the unique integrated representation on the simply connected Lie group eG with Lie algebra g. Next, have G1 = eG/ Γ1 and G2 = eG/ Γ2

be connected compact Lie-group realizations such that 

Γ1 ⊆ Γ2 ⊆ ker Π .

Further, set 

q : G1 → G2

as the canonical surjective homomorphism between connected Lie groups with Lie algebra g

such that the discrete central kernel of one is a subset of the discrete central kernel of the other (see Kirillov [28, Cor. 3.49]), and let 

Πi : Gi → U (H)10 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

be the descended unitary representations, so that 

Π2 ◦ q = Π 1.

Then for every bounded Borel function 

Φ : C → C,

every trace-class operator T ∈ T 1(H), and every bounded operator A ∈ B (H), the functions 

Fi(g) := Φ  Tr( T Πi(g)†A Πi(g)) , g ∈ Gi,

satisfy 

F1 = F2 ◦ q

and we see that Z

> G1

F1(g) dμ G1 (g) = 

Z

> G2

F2(g) dμ G2 (g).

Proof. Because Π 2 ◦ q = Π 1, for every g ∈ G1 we have Tr( T Π1(g)†A Π1(g)) = Tr( T Π2(q(g)) †A Π2(q(g))) .

Applying Φ yields F1 = F2 ◦ q.Since q : G1 → G2 is a continuous surjective homomorphism of compact groups, Theo-rem 2.1.3 gives q∗μG1 = μG2 . Therefore, 

Z

> G1

F1(g) dμ G1 (g) = 

Z

> G1

F2(q(g)) dμ G1 (g) = 

Z

> G2

F2(h) dμ G2 (h).

From the definition of trace-class observables, this corollary shows that, for our purposes, one may work with the unique closed, compact, connected matrix Lie group determined by the given Lie algebra representation without sacrificing the accuracy of the model. Further-more, as an interesting product of this corollary, we have that t-design and barren plateau structure are invariants of the Lie algebra alone and not of any group-specific topology. 11 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

## 2.2 The Dynamical Lie Algebraic Theory of Barren Plateaus 

The most systematic DLA-based theory of barren plateaus currently available is due to Ragone et al., with Fontana et al. describing the canonical adjoint formalism for the DLA theory. Ragone et al. begins with the observation that once the circuit is sufficiently deep, one may replace averaging over parameters by averaging over the compact Lie group gen-erated by the DLA, and then compute the first two moments of the loss by representation-theoretic means. In this way they obtain an exact Haar variance formula which unifies several previously separate mechanisms for barren plateaus. To tidily state their framework, let 

G = exp( g)denote the compact, connected Lie-group realization of the DLA given by the relevant rep-resentation. Decompose 

g = z ⊕ g1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ gk−1

into simple ideals together with the center. For each ideal gj , let Pgj denote the Hilbert– Schmidt orthogonal projection from End( H) onto the complexification of gj , and define the generalized purity of a Hermitian operator A by [37] 

Pgj (A) := Pgj (A) 2 

> HS

.

Up to notation, this is the Lie-algebraic quantity that measures how much of the state or observable is visible in the jth simple sector. The crucial assumption in Ragone et al. is that the circuit is sufficiently deep that its distribution forms a 2-design on each simple or abelian component. Equivalently, the first two moments of the circuit ensemble are assumed to agree with those of Haar measure on the corresponding components. Under this assumption, Haar integration on G becomes available, and one may compute the loss moments exactly. 

Definition 2.2.1 (t-design and approximate t-design) . Let ν be a distribution of unitaries associated with ensemble E in a compact group G acting on H. Its t-th moment operator is the superoperator 

M(t) 

> ν

(X) := 

Z

> E

U ⊗tX(U †)⊗t dν (U ).

If M(t) 

> E

= M(t) 

> G

, where M(t) 

> G

denotes the Haar moment operator on G, then E is an exact G

12 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

t-design. If instead 

∥M (t) 

> E

− M (t) 

> G

∥ ≤ ε

in a chosen operator norm, then E (or more accurately, ν) is called an ε-approximate Gt-design [2, 37]. In Ragone et al., the main exact variance theorem applies when either the observable or the input state lies in the represented Lie algebra: if O ∈ ig or ρ ∈ ig, then the loss expectation and variance decompose neatly according to the reductive splitting of g.

Theorem 2.2.2 (Ragone et al., schematic form) . Assume that the parameterized circuit is deep enough to form a 2-design on each component Gj = exp( gj ) of the compact Lie group generated by the DLA, and assume further that either O ∈ ig or ρ ∈ ig. Then: 1. the mean of the loss receives contributions only from the center z;2. the variance receives contributions only from the simple ideals; and 3. one has the exact formula 

Var θ[ℓθ(ρ, O )] = 

> k−1

X

> j=1

Pgj (ρ) Pgj (O)dim( gj ) .

This is an incredibly strong result. First, it replaces bounds by an exact Haar-sector variance formula. Second, it shows that the variance splits over the simple components of the DLA, so that trainability may be analyzed one ideal at a time. Third, it packages several familiar sources of barren plateaus into a single algebraic statement: large expressivity corresponds to large dim( gj ), highly generalized-entangled states correspond to small Pgj (ρ), and highly generalized-nonlocal observables correspond to small Pgj (O). This yields the central interpretation promoted in that paper, being that barren plateaus may arise absent noise from three algebraic sources: excessive circuit expressivity, insufficient purity of the initial state relative to the DLA, or insufficient purity of the observable relative to the DLA. In that sense, the DLA furnishes a common language for expressiveness-, state-, and observable-induced concentration. Ragone et al. also discuss extensions to SPAM noise (state preparation and measurement noise) and coherent noise (noise that causes deviations from the intended state without the loss of information). In their formalism, noise can suppress the same generalized purities or enlarge the effective DLA, and thereby induce additional concentration. Thus the DLA framework is a rather broad algebraic account of several known barren plateau mechanisms. 13 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Several assumptions of the DLA theory of barren plateaus are essential and should be stated explicitly, since they are precisely the assumptions whose finite-depth adequacy is later questioned in this thesis. 

Remark 2.2.3 (Assumptions in the DLA theory) . The accomplishments of Ragone et al. depend on several structural facts: 1. one passes from the actual finite-depth circuit ensemble to Haar averaging on the com-pact Lie group generated by the DLA, justified by a deep-circuit or 2-design hypothesis; 2. the main exact variance formula assumes that either the observable O or the input state ρ lies in the represented Lie algebra; 3. the practical approximation statements are expressed through exact or approximate 

t-design control, and therefore inherit the usual dependence on convergence-to-Haar heuristics; and 4. the DLA itself is an asymptotic expressivity object, so its associated compact Lie group may be much larger than the manifold actually explored by a shallow circuit. These are not flaws in the theory; on the contrary, they are exactly what makes the theory clean and powerful. But they do delimit its natural regime of validity. For the purposes of the present thesis, Ragone et al. provides the correct Haar-limit benchmark: once one has passed to a sufficiently mixed ensemble on the compact group generated by the DLA, the variance is governed by the semisimple ideal decomposition above. Much of what follows in later chapters may be read as an attempt to retain this Lie-theoretic clarity while replacing the full DLA group by a more depth-aware geometric object. It is worth recognizing that Ragone et al. also give a quantitative design-depth theorem in terms of the t-moment expressivity superoperator 

A(t) 

> EL

:= M(t) 

> EL

− M (t) 

> G

,

where EL denotes the depth-L ensemble. Their claim is that once ∥A (t) 

> EL

∥ is sufficiently small (less than one, so that the application of subsequent layers is a contractive map) and 

L is modestly large, the circuit meaningfully forms an approximate t-design and the Haar variance formula becomes accurate [37]. This design-based passage from finite depth to Haar is important background for the present thesis, since Chapter 5 returns to precisely this issue and when such convergence is or is not defensible. 14 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

## 2.3 Brief Aside on Jordan-Algebraic Wishart Systems 

A more recent and more ambitious generalization of the DLA picture is due to Anschuetz, who proposes the Jordan-algebraic Wishart systems framework, or JAWS , for VQA loss landscapes. The central observation is that for a variational family Uθ and observable O, the operators 

{U (θ)†OU (θ)}θ

generate under the anticommutator product a Jordan subalgebra 

A ⊆ HN (C).

Using the structure theory of finite-dimensional Jordan algebras, one decomposes 

A ∼= M

> α

Aα,

where each simple component Aα is isomorphic to HNα (Fα) for Fα ∈ { R, C, H}.This framework has real achievements. Most notably, it extends Lie-algebraic barren plateau formulas beyond the setting in which O or ρ must belong to the DLA—a circuit for which this is the case is called a Lie algebra-supported ansatz (LASA). Anschuetz derives variance formulas whose leading asymptotic term takes the form Var θ[ℓ(ρ; θ)] = X

> α

Tr  (Oα)2 Tr  (ρα)2

dim R(Aut( Aα)) + O(π),

and explicitly notes that this generalizes the corresponding LASA formulas of Ragone et al. Thus the JAWS framework genuinely enlarges the class of observables and states for which one can write asymptotic variance formulas. Even so, for the purposes of the present thesis, JAWS is best regarded as a refinement and extension of the same broad program and not a wholly separate foundation for VQA landscape theory. The group that enters its asymptotic formulas is the identity-connected automorphism group of the Jordan algebra A, whose connected components are products of the familiar classical groups SO (Nα), SU (Nα), and Sp (Nα) [2]. In other words, the role played in Ragone et al. by the compact group generated by the DLA is replaced by the compact symmetry group naturally attached to the Jordan algebra generated by the loss observable under the variational orbit. From this point of view, JAWS preserves much of the architecture of the DLA theory. One still organizes the variance by a reductive or semisimple decomposition into algebraic sectors, 15 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

one still computes asymptotic landscape statistics by passing to a compact symmetry group and its invariant measure, and one still relies on approximately uniform random initialization assumptions to access Wishart or Haar-type asymptotic regimes. The main conceptual gains are that the Jordan algebra sees a larger class of observables than the Lie algebra alone (therefore being strictly more expressive as a bookkeeping device for the loss landscape when compared to LASAs), and that it sanctions direct analysis of the density of poor minima [2]. For this thesis, however, the additional generality of JAWS is not central. The principal aim here is to refine the finite-depth geometry of Lie-algebraic barren plateau theory, not to develop a competing asymptotic framework. Since JAWS largely extends rather than replaces the DLA and Haar paradigm, and since most of the later arguments in this thesis are framed in terms of compact Lie-group geometry, Haar measure, and adjoint-sector visibility, we shall not pursue the Jordan-algebraic formalism further. It will reappear in the discussion chapter as a natural direction for future extension, especially if one wishes to incorporate symmetric products or noisy open-system dynamics, but that lies outside the main scope of the present work. 16 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

## CHAPTER 3 KRYLOV-LIE ALGEBRAS 3.1 Motivation from Measure Theory and Krylov Subspaces 

In light of the deficiencies of mainline VQA landscape theory, it can seem unclear where to go next in terms of a sensible theoretical framework. We can begin carving a path forward by taking lessons from measure theory. Specifically, given some VQA with pushforward measure Φ ∗νM over the image of its circuit parameters (which we conservatively take to be compact, naturally implying σ-finiteness of Φ ∗νM ), suppose that we have some “correct” compact approximation to its manifold structure, and that this structure does have an honest, normalized ( σ-finite) Haar measure over itself, μG [17, Thms. 2.10 and 2.20]. By the Lebesgue-Radon-Nikodym theorem [18, Thm. 3.8], we have that there exist uniquely-determined, σ-finite ν1 and ν2 such that ν1 is absolutely continuous with respect to μG , ν2

and μG are singular, Φ ∗νM = ν1 + ν2, and Φ∗νM (E) = 

Z

> E

dν 1

dμ G

dμ G + ν2(E) (3.1) for all Borel sets E in the σ-algebra of G, where dν 1 

> dμ G

is a unique, nonnegative Lebesgue-integrable Radon-Nikodym derivative for ν1. We then have the interpretation of dν 1 

> dμ G

as a probability density over the (geometric) Haar measure for our approximation to the VQA reachable manifold. Similarly, ν2 represents the component of our pushforward measure on our VQA that exists externally from distributional effects on the geometry of our approximate structure. It immediately follows that if one were able to find an approximate structure such that ν2 had total mass 0, then we would have a semi-canonical choice of measure and approximator for our VQA, since any probabilistic information we would want to investigate from quantities like moments could be purely decoupled into geometric contributions gleaned from the Haar measure of our approximator and sampling distortion over the geometry associated with our approximator. It is in this sense that such an approximator would be a model that is faithful to the underlying geometry of the VQA: we are not losing any information for a particular circuit by working with the Haar measure of the approximator instead of the pushforward measure of the VQA, but rather we are merely isolating the VQA’s geometric content (as opposed to the supplementary distributional content that lives on top of it). Furthermore, due to the suggestiveness of this representation, we would be 17 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

able to analyze evolutionary behavior of the VQA by discussing the flow of the Radon-Nikodym derivative under the dynamics of a chosen optimizer on the constant background of our approximator’s geometry. We can do even better still by explicitly recognizing the smoothness of the structures between which we are implicitly mapping: 

Theorem 3.1.1. Let the m-dimensional smooth reachable manifold of our VQA be M , and equip it with the finite parameter law 

νM = ˜ q d vol M

where ˜q ∈ L1(M ) and ˜q ≥ 0. Let G∗ be an n-dimensional compact Lie group, n ≤ m, with normalized Haar measure μG∗ . Suppose there exists an open set U ⊆ M such that 

νM (M \ U ) = 0 

and Φ|U : U → G ∗ is C1. If 

rank( dΦx) = n for νM -a.e. x ∈ U, 

then the singular component in the Lebesgue–Radon–Nikodym decomposition of Φ∗νM with respect to μG∗ is zero. Proof. Let 

R := {x ∈ U | rank( dΦx) = n}, C := M \ R. 

Since νM (M \ U ) = 0 and rank( dΦx) = n for νM -a.e. x ∈ U , we have 

νM (C) = 0 .

Hence Φ∗νM = Φ ∗(νM |R),

because for every Borel set E ⊆ G ∗,Φ∗(νM |C )( E) = νM (C ∩ Φ−1(E)) ≤ νM (C) = 0 .

Now fix x ∈ R. Since Φ |U is C1 and rank( dΦx) = n = dim G∗, the differential dΦx is surjective [31, Thm. 4.12]. Thus Φ is a submersion at x, and by the local submersion theorem there exist charts 

αx : Ux → eUx ⊆ Rm, βx : Vx → eVx ⊆ Rn,

18 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

with x ∈ Ux ⊆ U and Φ( x) ∈ Vx, such that in these coordinates 

βx ◦ Φ ◦ α−1 

> x

(u, v ) = u, 

where u ∈ Rn and v ∈ Rm−n [31, Thm. 4.12]. Because M is second countable, we may choose a countable cover {Ui}∞ 

> i=1

of R by such submersion neighborhoods [31, App. A]. Define a measurable disjointification by 

W1 := U1 ∩ R, Wi := ( Ui ∩ R) \ [

> j<i

(Uj ∩ R) (i ≥ 2) .

Then the sets Wi are pairwise disjoint, measurable, and 

R =

> ∞

G

> i=1

Wi.

Therefore 

νM |R =

> ∞

X

> i=1

νM |Wi and hence Φ∗νM =

> ∞

X

> i=1

Φ∗(νM |Wi ).

It therefore suffices to show that each measure 

νi := Φ ∗(νM |Wi )is absolutely continuous with respect to μG∗ .Fix i, and let A ⊆ G ∗ be Borel with μG∗ (A) = 0. Since the Haar measure on a compact Lie group is locally given by a smooth positive density with respect to the Euclidean Lebesgue measure in any smooth chart [31, Ch. 16], it follows that in the chart βi : Vi → eVi ⊆ Rn

associated to Ui, the set 

βi(A ∩ Vi)has Lebesgue measure zero in Rn.In the submersion coordinates on Ui, the map Φ is just the projection onto the first n

coordinates, so 

αi

 Φ−1(A ∩ Vi) ∩ Ui

 = {(x, y ) ∈ αi(Ui) = βi(Vi) × W ′ 

> i

x ∈ βi(A ∩ Vi)} = βi(A ∩ Vi) × W ′

> i

for some open set W ′ 

> i

⊆ Rm−n. By Fubini’s theorem, this product set has Lebesgue measure zero in Rm [18, Thm. 2.37]. Now νM = ˜ q d vol M is absolutely continuous with respect to the smooth volume measure 19 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

d vol M , and in local coordinates a smooth volume measure is a smooth positive density times the Lebesgue measure. Hence 

νM

 Φ−1(A ∩ Vi) ∩ Ui

 = 0 .

Since Wi ⊆ Ui, we obtain 

νi(A ∩ Vi) = νM

 Wi ∩ Φ−1(A ∩ Vi) = 0 .

On the other hand, νi is supported in Φ( Wi) ⊆ Vi, so 

νi(A) = νi(A ∩ Vi) = 0 .

Thus νi ≪ μG∗ for every i.Finally, a countable sum of measures absolutely continuous with respect to μG∗ is again absolutely continuous with respect to μG∗ [18, §3.2]. Therefore Φ∗νM ≪ μG∗ .

By the Lebesgue–Radon–Nikodym decomposition theorem, the singular component of Φ ∗νM

with respect to μG∗ is therefore zero [18, Thm. 3.8]. Before proceeding, it should be mentioned that by the coarea formula [16, §3.4][12, Ch. III], when the singular part of the Lebesgue decomposition is zero, we have that 

dΦ∗νM

dμ G∗

(g) = 

Z

> Φ−1(g)

˜q(x)

JΦ(x)dHm−n(x), (3.2) for μG∗ -almost every g, where JΦ =

q

det( dΦxdΦ†

> x

) is the metric Jacobian and Hm−n is the Hausdorff measure on the fiber. The importance of Theorem 3.1.1 is that it tells us that in order to even begin to approach the idea of a reasonable Lie group approximator to M , we cannot have a positive νM -mass set of critical points (which could under the pushforward place mass on a lower-dimensional subset of G∗, thereby creating a genuinely singular component), and more crucially that we should have this full-rank property of the Jacobian of our pushforward. In fact, if we have that dim G∗ > dim M (making full rank impossible), such as in the case of most DLAs, it is easy to see that we can no longer obtain a singular component with zero mass. The question thus becomes how to actually find such a Lie group approximation to M , especially 20 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

one that matches the dimension of M , as it is not terribly obvious how to do this, or if a Lie group that satisfies our requirements even exists (although it is relatively unforced in that setting to soften to the problem of finding the Lie group that minimizes the total mass of the singular part). Fortunately, to this end, we can take some inspiration from Krylov subspace methods. The idea of Krylov subspace methods is elementary: given a linear operator A on a vector space V , one selects a seed vector v ∈ V and studies the finite-dimensional subspace generated by repeated action of A on that seed. The order-r Krylov subspace is 

Kr(A, v ) = span {v, Av, A 2v, . . . , A r−1v}.

Equivalently, Kr(A, v ) is the space of all vectors of the form p(A)v, where p ranges over polynomials of degree at most r − 1 [38, Prop. 6.2]. In this sense, a Krylov subspace is the natural finite-dimensional receptacle for the action of A on the seed vector: it contains, by construction, all powers of A acting on v up to the prescribed order. The first important feature of these spaces is that they possess a built-in notion of trun-cation that is algebraically meaningful. Indeed, while Kr(A, v ) need not be invariant under arbitrary further action of A for small r, there is a first index—the grade of v relative to A,also called the grade —at which the sequence stabilizes, and beyond that point no genuinely new directions are produced by applying additional powers of A [22]. Concretely, once one reaches the grade degree, every higher power Akv can be written as a linear combination of the previously obtained vectors, so the Krylov subspace has become closed under further multiplication by A in the sense relevant to the generated dynamics; Kr(A, v ) is a cyclic module. This is precisely the structural phenomenon that is suggestive for our purposes: there is a canonical graded growth process, and at a finite stopping point one attains a canonical algebraic closure with respect to the operation generating the space. The second important feature is that Krylov constructions are remarkably flexible with respect to dimension. For a fixed operator A, the dimension of Kr(A, v ) depends strongly on the choice of seed v, and is controlled by the degree of the minimal polynomial of A relative to that seed [22]. Thus different seed vectors can produce Krylov spaces of dramatically different sizes, even for the same ambient operator. In practice this means that, by selecting the seed appropriately, one can realize a wide range of effective dimensions very easily (in fact any dimension up to the degree of A’s minimal polynomial, provided that one allows for any choice of initial seed), without ever needing to alter the underlying operator itself. This flexibility is one of the main reasons Krylov methods are so powerful as compression devices: the operator is fixed, while the seed determines which portion of its action is exposed at low 21 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

dimension [3, Ch. 11]. It is exactly these two features that make Krylov subspaces so attractive. On one hand, they provide a natural notion of graded approximation, together with a canonical stop-ping rule given by algebraic closure at the grade degree. On the other, they allow one to tune the dimension of the approximating object simply by changing the seed data. For our problem, however, ordinary Krylov subspaces are still insufficient, because they are funda-mentally linear and commutative in their construction: they are built from repeated powers of a single operator, whereas the expressive structure of a variational circuit is governed by noncommutative growth under repeated commutation of its generators. Thus, it is astute to ask whether one can construct an analogous object to Krylov sub-spaces in the Lie-theoretic setting. More specifically, one would like a graded family obtained not from powers Akv, but from repeated adjoint actions or nested commutators of chosen generators acting on some seed element or seed set. Such an object should retain the two desirable properties just discussed. First, it should admit a notion of grade degree at which further commutation produces no new directions, so that one reaches closure under the Lie bracket. Second, by varying the seed data, it should allow substantial control over the di-mension of the resulting space. If such a construction can be made precise, then it would furnish exactly the kind of finite-dimensional Lie-algebraic approximator we seek: one that is flexible in dimension, naturally graded, and capable of becoming a bona fide Lie algebra at finite grade. This aim is now what we shall set out to accomplish. 

## 3.2 Construction of Krylov and Krylov-Lie Algebras 

3.2.1 Krylov Algebras 

We shall begin by defining a slightly more abstract notion of Krylov algebra before eventually restricting our focus to a Lie-centric structure. To this end, we introduce the notions of seeds ,

block seeds , and ◦-words .

Definition 3.2.1 (Seeds and block seeds) . Let V be a vector space over a field F.A seed is an element v ∈ V \ { 0}.A block seed is an s-tuple Ψ = ( ψ1, . . . , ψ s) ∈ (V \ { 0})s,

Remark 3.2.2 . Clearly, if we have a surjective parameterization for V, then one can always recursively produce a linearly independent block seed for any s ≤ dim( V ) by projecting out 22 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

all previous vectors from the parameterization with 1 − Ps−1 

> i=1

|ψi⟩ ⟨ ψi| (assuming normalized vectors). Furthermore, it is occasionally valuable to restrict to unit norm seeds (call this space Σ s) so that we are working over a compact space. Since this never alters the linear dependence of vectors in our block seed, we can typically perform this restriction without it affecting the validity or complexity of our proofs. 

Definition 3.2.3 (◦-words generated by a block seed) . Let V be a vector space over F,

◦ : a × a → a a bilinear operation on a chosen algebra a induced by said operation, S =

{H1, ..., H n} a finite set of generators for a, and Ψ = ( ψ1, . . . , ψ s) a block seed in ( V \ { 0})s

(Definition 3.2.1). For every integer r ≥ 1 and every multi-index ( i1, . . . , i r) ∈ { 1, . . . , n }r

define the associated nested ◦-word w◦(i1, ..., i r) as 

w◦(i1, ..., i r) = w◦(Hi1 , ..., H ir ) := Hir ◦ (· · · ◦ (Hi3 ◦ (Hi2 ◦ Hi1 )) · · · ),

and call the set of all such words up to a depth of k in our generators 

W≤k(S) := {w◦(i1, ..., i r) | 1 ≤ r ≤ k, i ℓ ∈ { 1, .., n }} .

Remark 3.2.4 . On occasion, specifying the specific indices and order of our words will be inconvenient and tedious. In these cases, we write 

w◦(H1, . . . , H n) ∈ W ≤k(S)to mean any arbitrary word constructed from the generator set S = {H1, . . . , H n} up to a depth of k. Also, when unambiguous, we often say W≤k to mean W≤k(S) for brevity, and we use Wk to refer to the set of all ◦-words of exactly depth k.We now are equipped to introduce Krylov filtrations as well as their algebraically closed cousins, Krylov algebras. 

Definition 3.2.5 (Krylov subspace for a binary product) . Let V , ◦, S, and Ψ be as Def-inition 3.2.3. The grade-k Krylov subspace (or filtration) generated by the block seed Ψ (Definition 3.2.1) with respect to ◦ and the generators S is 

K(k)Ψ (S) := span F{wψ j | w ∈ W ≤k , 1 ≤ j ≤ s}.

If the generators and depth are left implicit, then the Krylov subspace is denoted KΨ.The full Krylov filtration is the increasing family 

K(1) Ψ (S) ⊂ K (2) Ψ (S) ⊂ · · · .

23 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Meanwhile, if there exists a least integer r∗ ≥ 1 such that 

K∞ 

> Ψ

(S) = K(r∗)Ψ (S) = K∗

> Ψ

(S),

then r∗ is called the grade degree of the filtration. 

Definition 3.2.6 (Krylov algebra) . Assume now that V = H is a finite-dimensional Hilbert space, and let KΨ(S) be our depth-k Krylov subspace of dimension r(k)Ψ as in Definition 3.2.5. Say that 

BΨ := 

h

b1 · · · br(k)Ψ

i

is the corresponding basis matrix of vectors than span our Krylov subspace. The orthogonal projector (which can include an indicator for depth if desired) onto KΨ(S) is 

PΨ := BΨB+Ψ = BΨ(B†

> Ψ

BΨ)−1B†

> Ψ

,

where B+Ψ denotes the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse [38, §1.9]. If BΨ has orthonormal columns, then 

PΨ = BΨB†

> Ψ

.

Define the compressed or reduced generators on the ambient space by 

eHj := PΨHj PΨ, j = 1 , . . . , n. 

The Krylov algebra associated with the block seed Ψ is the ◦-algebra generated by these compressed generators, namely 

K(k)Ψ (S) := span F

n

w◦( eHi1 , . . . , eHir ) w◦( eHi1 , . . . , eHir ) ∈ fW(k)

> ∞

o

where fW(k) 

> ∞

is the finite set of all ◦-words of compressed generators induced by the depth of commutators used to create the Krylov subspace. 

Remark 3.2.7 . Equivalently, in basis-free notation one may regard KΨ(S) as the algebra generated by the compressed operators PΨHj PΨ + ( I − PΨ) when working over the full space 

H, or simply PΨHj |KΨ(S) if restricted to the Krylov subspace. Also, it is vital to remember that the depth k does not refer to the depth of the nested ◦-products of the compressed generators in l(k)Ψ , but rather the depth of the nested ◦-products used to generate the Krylov subspace K(k)Ψ .24 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

3.2.2 Krylov-Lie Algebras 

With this setup, Krylov-Lie subspaces and algebras are quite easy to describe. 

Definition 3.2.8 (Krylov-Lie subspace) . Let V be a vector space over F, [ · , · ] : g × g → g

the Lie bracket commutator for the Lie algebra g, S = {H1, ..., H n} a finite set of generators for g, and Ψ = ( ψ1, . . . , ψ s) a block seed in ( V \ { 0})s. The grade-k Krylov-Lie filtration generated by Ψ, K(k)Ψ (S), is then the grade-k Krylov subspace generated by Ψ with respect to the Lie bracket and S, with the full Krylov-Lie filtration, and grade degree (which always exists when H has finite dimension) defined analogously as in Definition 3.2.3. 

Definition 3.2.9 (Krylov-Lie algebra) . Let V , S, [ · , · ], and Ψ be as in Definition 3.2.8. Say our depth-k Krylov-Lie subspace is K(k)Ψ (S) with basis matrix of spanning vectors B(k)Ψ and orthogonal projector P (k)Ψ (Definition 3.2.6 and Definition 3.2.8). Then for the compressed (or reduced) generators eH(k) 

> j

= P (k)Ψ Hj P (k)Ψ (see Definition 3.2.6), 

l(k)Ψ (S) := span F

n

w( eH(k) 

> i1

, . . . , eH(k) 

> ir

) w( eH(k) 

> i1

, . . . , eH(k) 

> ir

) ∈ fW(k)

> ∞

o

= Lie F⟨ eH(k)1 , . . . , eH(k) 

> n

⟩

is called the depth-k Krylov-Lie algebra (KLA) generated by the block seed Ψ. If k = r∗,the grade degree of Definition 3.2.6, then this KLA is the unique and minimal one that has saturated the commutator. 

Remark 3.2.10 (Krylov-Lie algebras are Krylov algebras) . In other words, a depth-k Krylov-Lie algebra l(k)Ψ (S) (or l(k)Ψ when the generators are left implicit, and lΨ if the depth is implict as well) is a depth-k Krylov algebra whose algebraic product is a Lie bracket, by Definition 3.2.6. 

Remark 3.2.11 (VQA conventions) . In the setting of VQAs, the ambient vector space is the Hilbert space H ∼= C2N

(assumed to have dimension d), and a block seed Ψ = ( ψ1, . . . , ψ s)consists of state vectors in H. The generators S = {H1, . . . , H n} are taken to be Hermitian linear operators acting on H so that the associated ansatz unitaries are of the form 

U (θ) = eiθ pHip · · · eiθ 1Hi1 ,

and i1, . . . , i p are indices corresponding to the generators in S.From the Lie-theoretic point of view, the more natural algebra is the real Lie algebra of anti-Hermitian operators 

u(d) = {X ∈ End( H) | X† = −X},

25 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

or alternatively, the real Lie subalgebra generated by iH 1, . . . , iH n. Indeed, if Hi and Hj are Hermitian, then [ Hi, H j ] is anti-Hermitian rather than Hermitian. Accordingly, whenever we work with Hermitian generators, the underlying Lie structure should be understood via the identification 

H ←→ iH. 

Equivalently, one may transport the Lie bracket to the Hermitian side by defining [A, B ] := i[A, B ], A, B ∈ Herm( H),

so that [ A, B ] is again Hermitian. Thus, up to the harmless factor of i, the Hermitian and anti-Hermitian conventions encode the same real Lie algebra. Throughout the remainder of this work, we shall use Hermitian generators for physical clarity. Whenever Krylov-Lie words (see Definition 3.2.3 and Definition 3.2.9) are written directly in the Hj or their compressed variants, the corresponding factors of i needed to pass to the mathematically natural anti-Hermitian Lie algebra are to be understood implicitly. In particular, all Lie-theoretic spans of generators are understood as real spans, whereas the associated Krylov subspaces of states in H may still be taken over C.Next, we shall discuss how to induce a Krylov-Lie group (KLG) from these Krylov-Lie algebras (KLAs). 

Definition 3.2.12 (Krylov-Lie group) . Let K(k)Ψ (S) ⊂ H be our Krylov-Lie subspace as in Definition 3.2.8, P (k)Ψ denote the orthogonal projector onto K(k)Ψ (S) as in Definition 3.2.6, and let l(k)Ψ (S) ⊂ u(K(k)Ψ ) be the corresponding Krylov-Lie algebra (Definition 3.2.9). By Lie’s third theorem, there exists a unique simply-connected Lie group eK(k)Ψ with Lie algebra canonically identified with lΨ(S) [28, Thm. 3.48 and Cor. 3.49]. We call eK(k)Ψ the 

initial depth-k Krylov-Lie group for (Ψ , S). When our Krylov-Lie algebra is realized by a subalgebra of the Lie algebra for a unitary group, by Lie’s second theorem [28, Thm. 3.38], the inclusion 

l(k)Ψ (S) ,→ u(K(k)Ψ )integrates uniquely to a Lie-group homomorphism Π(k)Ψ : eK(k)Ψ → U (K(k)Ψ ).

We define the depth-k Krylov-Lie group associated to (Ψ , S) to be the compact, connected 26 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

matrix Lie group 

K(k)Ψ := Π (k)Ψ ( eK(k)Ψ ) = 

D

exp( dΠ(k)Ψ (X)) X ∈ l(k)Ψ (S)

E

⊆ U (K(k)Ψ ),

where the bar means closure in the topology of U (K(k)Ψ ). Isomorphically, viewing K(k)Ψ as a subspace of H, we may realize K(k)Ψ in the ambient unitary group U (d) through the embedding 

ι(k)Ψ : U (K(k)Ψ ) → U (d), ι(k)Ψ (U ) = P (k)Ψ U P (k)Ψ + ( I − P (k)Ψ ).

Remark 3.2.13 . The image Π (k)Ψ ( eK(k)Ψ ) ⊆ U (ℓ(k)Ψ ) is a connected Lie subgroup with Lie algebra 

l(k)Ψ (S), but it need not be closed [28, Thm. 3.43]. The topological closure K(k)Ψ is therefore the natural compact matrix-group realization of the Krylov-Lie construction. For measure-theoretic purposes below, the normalized Haar measure on K(k)Ψ is the canonical reference measure—by Corollary 2.1.4, the discrete kernel and global lattice data of the compact connected model (or any Lie-centric model, for that matter) become irrelevant for integrals of observables that factor through the represented unitary action, which includes the moments we wish to calculate. 

## 3.3 Structural Results on Krylov-Lie Algebras and Groups 

With these definitions of Krylov-Lie algebras and Krylov-Lie groups, we shall prove some germane structural results about our constructions. 

Proposition 3.3.1 (Haar measure and unimodularity) . The compact Lie group KΨ (Defi-nition 3.2.12) admits a unique, normalized, bi-invariant Haar measure μKΨ .Proof. This follows immediately from every compact Lie group being unimodular [28, §4.6][17, 

§2.4]. 

Proposition 3.3.2 (Invariant inner products) . The KLA lΨ (Definition 3.2.9) admits an 

Ad( KΨ)-invariant (Definition 3.2.12) positive-definite inner product. Proof. Let KΨ act on lΨ via the adjoint representation. Since KΨ is compact, the standard averaging argument with normalized Haar measure turns any positive-definite inner product on lΨ into an Ad( KΨ)-invariant positive-definite inner product; see Hall [24, Ch. 4]. 

Proposition 3.3.3 (Reductivity of the KLA) . The Krylov-Lie algebra lΨ of Definition 3.2.9 is reductive. More precisely, 

lΨ = z(lΨ) ⊕ [lΨ, lΨ],

27 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

where z(lΨ) is abelian and [lΨ, lΨ] is semisimple of compact type. Moreover, this decomposition is orthogonal with respect to any Ad( KΨ)-invariant positive-definite inner product on lΨ.Proof. Since KΨ is compact, lΨ is a compact Lie algebra. By the structure theorem for compact Lie algebras [28, §6.4 and §6.8], 

lΨ = z(lΨ) ⊕ [lΨ, lΨ],

and [ lΨ, lΨ] is semisimple. Now let ⟨· , ·⟩ be any Ad( KΨ)-invariant positive-definite inner product on lΨ. If Z ∈ z(lΨ), then for all X, Y ∈ lΨ,

⟨[X, Y ], Z ⟩ = ⟨X, [Y, Z ]⟩ = 0 ,

since [ Y, Z ] = 0. Hence [ lΨ, lΨ] ⊆ z(lΨ)⊥. Because lΨ = z(lΨ) ⊕ [lΨ, lΨ], the decomposition is orthogonal. 

Theorem 3.3.4 (Restricted DLA action on the Krylov–Lie algebra) . Let lΨ(S) be a Krylov-Lie algebra in the sense of Definition 3.2.9, with associated Krylov-Lie subspace KΨ(S) ⊆ H 

(Definition 3.2.8), orthogonal projector PΨ (Definition 3.2.6), and compressed generators 

eHj = PΨHj PΨ, j = 1 , . . . , n. 

Next, let 

g := Lie ⟨H1, . . . , H n⟩ = z(g) ⊕ [g, g] ⊆ u(d)

be the reductive dynamical Lie algebra generated by the Hermitian circuit generators, with the convention of Remark 3.2.11. Then the following are equivalent: 1. 

Hj KΨ ⊂ K Ψ ∀ j = 1 , . . . , n. 

2. Every X ∈ g preserves KΨ, so restriction defines a Lie algebra homomorphism 

ρΨ : g → u(KΨ), ρΨ(X) = X|KΨ .

3. The restricted action of g on KΨ is represented by the Lie algebra homomorphism 

ρΨ : g → u(KΨ), ρΨ(X) = PΨXP Ψ,

28 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

and 

ρΨ(g) = lΨ(S).

Thus by the fact that lΨ and g are both reductive Lie algebras, lΨ must contain an abelian subalgebra or a Lie subalgebra that is an image of the semisimple part of g.Proof. We prove (1) ⇒ (2) ⇒ (3) ⇒ (1). (1) ⇒ (2): Define 

I(KΨ) := {X ∈ u(d) | X(KΨ) ⊂ K Ψ}.

This is a real Lie subalgebra of u(d): it is closed under real linear combinations, and if 

X, Y ∈ I(KΨ), then [X, Y ]( KΨ) = XY (KΨ) − Y X (KΨ) ⊂ K Ψ.

Hence [ X, Y ] ∈ I(KΨ). By hypothesis, Hj ∈ I(KΨ) for all j. Since g is the smallest real Lie subalgebra of u(d)containing H1, . . . , H n, it follows that 

g ⊆ I(KΨ).

Therefore every X ∈ g preserves KΨ, so restriction defines 

ρΨ(X) := X|KΨ ∈ u(KΨ).

For X, Y ∈ g, because both X, Y preserve KΨ we note that ∀ v ∈ K Ψ,[ρΨ(X), ρ Ψ(Y )]( v) = ρΨ(X)ρΨ(Y )( v) − ρΨ(Y )ρΨ(X)( v) = X(Y v ) − Y (Xv ) = [ X, Y ]v. 

Then by definition, 

ρΨ([ X, Y ]) = [ X, Y ]|KΨ = [ ρΨ(X), ρ Ψ(Y )] ,

so ρΨ is a Lie algebra homomorphism. (2) ⇒ (3): Identify the projector PΨ onto the Krylov subspace. The matrix of X|KΨ is 

PΨXP Ψ, so the restricted representation is given by 

ρΨ(X) = PΨXP Ψ.

In particular, 

ρΨ(Hj ) = PΨHj PΨ = eHj .

29 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Hence ρΨ(g) is a real Lie subalgebra containing eH1, . . . , eHn, so 

lΨ(S) ⊂ ρΨ(g).

Conversely, since ρΨ is a Lie algebra homomorphism and g is generated by H1, . . . , H n, the image ρΨ(g) is generated by ρΨ(H1), . . . , ρ Ψ(Hn), i.e. by eH1, . . . , eHn. Therefore 

ρΨ(g) ⊆ lΨ(S),

and it is seen that 

ρΨ(g) = lΨ(S).

Moreover, since ρΨ is a Lie algebra homomorphism of reductive Lie algebras (by Proposi-tion 3.3.3), by the First Isomorphism Theorem and the fact that ker ρΨ is an ideal, we have that 

ρΨ(g) ∼= z(g)/(z(g) ∩ ker ρΨ) ⊕ [g, g]/([ g, g] ∩ ker ρΨ).

Thus, if ker ρΨ does not contain the entire center of g, then z(g)/(z(g) ∩ ker ρΨ) is isomorphic to an abelian subalgebra of g, and if ker ρΨ does contain the entire center of g, then by standard theory of semisimple Lie algebras, the quotient [ g, g]/([ g, g] ∩ ker ρΨ) is isomorphic to a semisimple ideal in g [28, §6.7][24, Ch. 7]. That is to say, we have that lΨ is isomorphic to an algebra that contains a nontrivial abelian subalgebra of g or is itself isomorphic to a semisimple ideal of g.(3) ⇒ (1): Under (3), ρΨ is the matrix representation of the restricted action of g on KΨ.In particular, for each generator Hj , the restriction Hj |KΨ is well defined. Consequently, 

Hj KΨ ⊂ K Ψ ∀ j = 1 , . . . , n. 

Remark 3.3.5 (Restriction versus compression) . The hypothesis of Proposition 3.3.4 is sub-stantially stronger than merely having a Krylov-Lie state space KΨ ⊂ H . If KΨ fails to be invariant under the original generators, one may still form compressed operators 

eHj := PΨHj PΨ ∈ End( KΨ),

where PΨ denotes the orthogonal projector onto KΨ, and then study the Lie algebra generated by the eHj . However, this yields a compressed or reduced Lie model on KΨ, not the restriction of the original DLA to an invariant subspace. 30 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

The relevance of this hypothesis is that it educates us that compression does not in general preserve Lie brackets unless the subspace is invariant. Given the importance of dimension matching in constructing a suitable Lie group approximator to M , since invariance forces a homomorphism and necessarily that lΨ is isomorphic to a subalgebra of g by the proof of Theorem 3.3.4, greatly restricting the possible dimension(s) of lΨ, we should not expect most usable Krylov-Lie algebras to possess this sort of invariance. 

## 3.4 Dimension-Matching and Seed Dependence 

To elucidate some of the ever-essential dimensional structure of Krylov-Lie algebras (and correspondingly, Krylov-Lie groups), we shall spend a reasonable portion of this text on the algebraic geometry of Krylov-Lie subspaces and Krylov-Lie algebras. Although this sort of language is uncommon in the VQA literature, our arguments rely only on basic facts about polynomial or real-analytic maps, algebraic sets, and genericity, and an introductory expo-sure to the subject like in the book of Beltrametti et al. or that of Harris [6, 25] should prove sufficient to understand the contents of this section. Nonetheless, a more sophisticated anal-ysis of the algebro-geometric properties of the sets constructed hereafter may be warranted in future work to improve our grasp on the practicality of finding dimension-matched KLAs and KLGs. Following this excursion, we shall also derive some generic bounds for the grade-k Krylov-Lie subspace dimension as well as the KLA dimension with Witt’s formula. 

Theorem 3.4.1 (Determinantal stratification of seed-dependent Krylov–Lie dimensions) .

Fix a depth k, a generator set S = {H1, . . . , H n} ⊆ End( Cd), and a block size s ≥ 1

(Definition 3.2.1 and Definition 3.2.9). Let W≤k be the finite set of Lie words in S of depth at most k (Definition 3.2.3), and define 

Ek : ( Cd)s \ { 0} → Mat d×sN k (C)

by 

Ek(Ψ) = w(ψa)  

> w∈W ≤k,1≤a≤s

, Ψ = ( ψ1, . . . , ψ s),

where Nk = |W ≤k|.Then for every r ≥ 0, the locus 

X≤r := {Ψ ∈ (Cd)s \ { 0} | dim K(k)Ψ (S) ≤ r}

is a Zariski closed affine algebraic set, cut out by the vanishing of all (r + 1) × (r + 1) minors 

31 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

of Ek(Ψ) . Equivalently, the locus 

X≥r := {Ψ ∈ (Cd)s \ { 0} | dim K(k)Ψ (S) ≥ r}

is Zariski open. Proof. By construction, dim K(k)Ψ (S) = rank Ek(Ψ) .

A matrix has rank at most r if and only if all of its ( r + 1) × (r + 1) minors vanish. Since each entry of Ek(Ψ) is polynomial in the coordinates of Ψ, each such minor is a polynomial on ( Cd)s. Hence 

X≤r

is the common zero locus of these minors, and therefore is Zariski closed, as is X≤r−1 [6, Ch. 1][25, Lecture 1]. The complement of the latter, X>r −1 = X≥r, is Zariski open. 

Corollary 3.4.2 (Positive-measure genericity) . In the setting of Theorem 3.4.1, suppose there exists a block seed Ψ0 ∈ (Cd)s \ { 0} (see Definition 3.2.1) such that 

dim K(k)Ψ0 (S) ≥ r, 

where K(k)Ψ (S) is the Krylov-Lie subspace of Definition 3.2.8. Then the set 

X≥r = {Ψ ∈ (Cd)s \ { 0} | dim K(k)Ψ (S) ≥ r}

contains a nonempty Zariski open subset of (Cd)s. In particular, X≥r has positive Lebesgue measure in (Cd)s ∼= R2ds [7, §2.8][39]. Proof. If there exists Ψ 0 with rank Ek(Ψ 0) ≥ r, then some r × r minor of Ek is nonzero at Ψ0. Hence that minor is not the zero polynomial, and its nonvanishing locus is a nonempty Zariski open subset contained in X≥r [6, Ch. 1]. A proper complex algebraic subset of CN has empty Euclidean interior and, being con-tained locally in the zero set of a nonzero holomorphic polynomial, has Lebesgue measure zero [7, §2.8][39]. Therefore a nonempty Zariski open subset of CN has full measure in some Euclidean ball, in particular positive Lebesgue measure [7, §2.8][39]. 

Theorem 3.4.3 (Generic maximal dimension) . Fix k, S, and m as in Corollary 3.4.2, and set 

rmax := max 

> Ψ∈(Cd)s

dim K(k)Ψ (S),

32 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

where K(k)Ψ (S) is the Krylov-Lie subspace of Definition 3.2.8. Then the set 

Xmax := {Ψ ∈ (Cd)s \ { 0} | dim K(k)Ψ (S) = rmax }

is a nonempty Zariski open subset of (Cd)s. In particular, Xmax is Euclidean dense and has positive Lebesgue measure. Proof. Clearly rmax exists since dimension only assumes integer values and dim K(k)Ψ (S) ≤ d,where d is the dimension of our starting Hilbert space. Then by Corollary 3.4.2, as at least one Ψ must give a dimension of rmax for it to be the maximal dimension, we see that 

Xmax = {Ψ ∈ (Cd)s \ { 0} | dim K(k)Ψ (S) ≥ rmax } = {Ψ ∈ (Cd)s \ { 0} | dim K(k)Ψ (S) = rmax }

has positive Lebesgue measure. 

Proposition 3.4.4 (Determinantal seed stratification) . Fix a depth k, a generator set 

S ⊆ End( Cd), and a block size s ≥ 1 (see Definition 3.2.9 and Definition 3.2.1). Let 

Ek(Ψ) be the polynomial evaluation matrix associated to the depth-k Krylov-Lie subspace (Definition 3.2.8). Then for every r ≥ 0,

X=r := {Ψ ∈ (Cd)s \ { 0} | dim K(k)Ψ (S) = r}

is locally closed. Proof. As before, dim K(k)Ψ (S) = rank Ek(Ψ) .

Fix r ≥ 0. Then define 

X=r = {Ψ ∈ (Cd)s \ { 0} | dim K(k)Ψ (S) = r} = {Ψ ∈ (Cd)s \ { 0} | rank Ek(Ψ) = r}.

By Theorem 3.4.1 X≤r−1 is Zariski closed, where for r = 0 we interpret X≤− 1 = ∅. Therefore 

X=r = X≤r \ X≤r−1.

Thus X=r is the difference of two Zariski-closed sets and is locally closed [25, Lecture 3]. 

Corollary 3.4.5 (Genericity inside a rank-drop closure) . If X=r is has at least one element, then X=r contains a nonempty Zariski open subset of its closure in the Zariski topology 

X=r

> Zar

. Equivalently, rank r is generic on its support [25, Lecture 3]. 

33 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Proof. By Proposition 3.4.4, the rank-r stratum 

X=r = {Ψ ∈ (Cd)s \ { 0} | dim K(k)Ψ (S) = r}

is locally closed. A well-known characterization of locally closed subsets states that a subset is locally closed if and only if it is open in its Zariski closure [25, Lecture 3]. Therefore X=r is Zariski open in X=r

> Zar

.If X=r̸ = ∅, then this open subset is nonempty. Hence X=r contains a nonempty Zariski open subset of its closure, namely itself viewed as an open subset of X=r

> Zar

. That is to say, rank r is generic on its support, in the sense that it holds on a nonempty Zariski open subset of X=r

> Zar

.

Remark 3.4.6 . Corollary 3.4.5 does not imply that X=r has positive Lebesgue measure in the full ambient space Hs \ { 0}. If X=r 

> Zar

is a proper algebraic subset of Hs \ { 0}, then it has Lebesgue measure zero, and so does X=r [7, §2.8][39]. What the corollary asserts is instead that rank-r is Zariski-generic after restricting to the natural algebraic locus on which that rank can occur [25, Lecture 3][7, §2.8]. 

Lemma 3.4.7 (Local algebraicity of the KLA dimension) . Fix k, s, and r. Let U ⊆ (Cd)s \{0} be a nonempty Zariski-open subset on which 

dim K(k)Ψ (S) = r

is constant, where K(k)Ψ is the Krylov-Lie subspace of Definition 3.2.8, and on which a basis matrix BΨ ∈ Mat d×r(C) for K(k)Ψ (S) is chosen algebraically by a nonvanishing r × r minor of the evaluation matrix of Theorem 3.4.1. For j = 1 , . . . , n , define the compressed generators on K(k)Ψ (S) as 

eHj (Ψ) := BΨB+Ψ Hj BΨB+Ψ |K(k)Ψ (S) ∈ u(r).

Then each entry of eHj (Ψ) is a rational function on U . Furthermore, there exists a finite set 

Vr of Lie words (Definition 3.2.3), depending only on r, such that if 

LU (Ψ) := vec( w( eH1(Ψ) , . . . , eHn(Ψ)))  

> w∈V r

,

then 

dim l(k)Ψ (S) = rank LU (Ψ) for all Ψ ∈ U, 

34 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

where l(k)Ψ is the Krylov-Lie algebra of Definition 3.2.9. After multiplying by a common denominator D(Ψ) ̸ = 0 on U , the matrix D(Ψ) LU (Ψ) has polynomial entries and the same rank on U . Consequently, for every ℓ,

U≤ℓ := {Ψ ∈ U | dim l(k)Ψ (S) ≤ ℓ}

is Zariski closed in U , its complement is open in U , as is the locus where dim l(k)Ψ (S) is maximal on U .Proof. Because a fixed r × r minor of the evaluation matrix is nonzero on U , the chosen basis matrix BΨ depends algebraically on Ψ. Since BΨ has full column rank r on U ,

B+Ψ = ( B†

> Ψ

BΨ)−1B†

> Ψ

,

so the entries of B+Ψ , and hence of each eHj (Ψ), are rational functions on U due to the presence of the inverse. Since any KLA for which the Krylov subspace dimension is r has an upper bound of r2

on its dimension, there exists a finite collection Vr of Lie words of bounded depth, depending only on r, whose evaluations span the Lie algebra generated by eH1(Ψ) , . . . , eHn(Ψ). To wit, 

Vr is independent of Ψ for all choices of block seed on U . Therefore dim l(k)Ψ (S) = rank LU (Ψ) .

Let D(Ψ) be a common denominator for the entries of LU (Ψ). Since D(Ψ) ̸ = 0 on U ,multiplying by D(Ψ) does not change rank on U . Hence dim l(k)Ψ (S) = rank( D(Ψ) LU (Ψ)) ,

where D(Ψ) LU (Ψ) has polynomial entries. The rank-≤ ℓ locus is therefore cut out on U

by the vanishing of all ( ℓ + 1) × (ℓ + 1) minors of this polynomial matrix, so it is Zariski closed in U . The final claim follows by taking complements and repetition of the argument in Theorem 3.4.3. 

Corollary 3.4.8 (Local KLA genericity inside a rank-drop closure) . Take the setup of Lemma 3.4.7. Then 

U=ℓ := {Ψ ∈ U | dim l(k)Ψ (S) = ℓ}

is locally closed in the Zariski topology, where l(k)Ψ is the Krylov-Lie algebra of Definition 3.2.9. In addition, rank ℓ is generic on its own support. 

35 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Proof. By an identical argument to Corollary 3.4.4, U=ℓ is locally closed. The claim then follows from Lemma 3.4.7 and the reasoning of Corollary 3.4.5 . 

Theorem 3.4.9 (Global constructibility on a fixed Krylov stratum) . Fix r ≥ 0, and define 

Yr,ℓ := {Ψ ∈ (Cd)s \ { 0} | dim K(k)Ψ (S) = r, dim l(k)Ψ (S) = ℓ},

where K(k)Ψ is the Krylov-Lie subspace (Definition 3.2.8) and l(k)Ψ is the Krylov-Lie algebra (Definition 3.2.9). Then each Yr,ℓ is constructible in (Cd)s. Moreover, if 

Mr := max 

> Ψ∈X=r

dim l(k)Ψ (S),

then 

Yr,M r = {Ψ ∈ X=r | dim l(k)Ψ (S) = Mr}

is Zariski open in X=r (see Corollary 3.4.5). In particular, if X=r is nonempty and irreducible in the sense that it cannot be written as the union of two proper closed subsets of itself in the Zariski topology, then Yr,M r is a nonempty Zariski-open dense subset of X=r. If X=r

is nonempty and reducible, then we have genericity of each irreducible X=r component’s maximal KLA dimension (Definition 3.2.9) on every irreducible component of X=r.Proof. Cover X=r by the many principal-open sets Uα on which a fixed nonvanishing r × r

minor of the evaluation matrix determines an algebraic basis selection (principal opens form a basis for the Zariski topology [25, Lecture 1]). This can be done with finitely many Uα

because the evaluation matrix L(Ψ) of Lemma 3.4.7 has finitely many r × r minors. On each 

Uα, Lemma 3.4.7 and Corollary 3.4.8 shows that the loci (Uα)=ℓ = {Ψ ∈ Uα | dim l(k)Ψ (S) = ℓ}

are locally closed in Uα, and that the maximal-rank locus on Uα is open in Uα.Hence 

Yr,ℓ = [

> α

 X=r ∩ (Uα)=ℓ



is a finite union of locally closed subsets, and therefore is constructible. Likewise, 

Yr,M r = [

> α

 X=r ∩ { Ψ ∈ Uα | dim l(k)Ψ (S) ≥ Mr}

is open in X=r, since each term is open in X=r and the set is constructible. If X=r is irreducible and nonempty, then every nonempty open subset of X=r is dense. 36 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Since Mr is attained somewhere on X=r, the set Yr,M r is nonempty, hence dense in X=r. Else, if X=r is reducible, then the same rationale holds on each irreducible component of X=r.

Remark 3.4.10 . Since the exceptional locus is a proper algebraic subset of ( Cd)s, it has Lebesgue measure zero in the ambient real vector space R2dm [7, §2.8][39]. Hence the maximal KLA dimension holds for almost every block seed with respect to the Lebesgue measure. These algebro-geometric results are quite informative: we have the clean statement that we should usually expect maximal dimension given fixed k and S. However, given that we wish to find dimension-matched sets, we must demonstrate flexibility of the Krylov-Lie construction in attaining other dimensions. Notice that while our theorems do show genericity of maximal KLA dimension, they very much do not preclude the possibility of smaller dimension. On the contrary, we should expect quite a wide variety of attainable dimensions since linear dependence of vectors (and therefore rank drop) can very much occur in the selection of block seeds, and we have the monotonic adjustment knob of commutator depth k to aid in our construction of KLAs of desired dimension. That said, since it is quite difficult to generically prove existence of specific seeds granting particular dimensions based on attributes of DLAs, we instead resort to isolating upper bounds for chosen depths so that we may at minimum are aware of worst-case estimates for the granularity of dimension of arbitrary Krylov-Lie structures. 

Proposition 3.4.11 (Universal upper bound from Witt’s formula) . Let H ∼= Cd, let 

S = {H1, . . . , H n} ⊆ End( H),

let Ψ = ( ψ1, . . . , ψ s) ∈ H s \ { 0} be a block seed (Definition 3.2.1), and let k ≥ 1. For each integer j ≥ 1, define 

ℓn(j) := 1

j

X

> e|j

μ(e) nj/e ,

where μ : N → {− 1, 0, 1} is the M¨ obius function, i.e. 

μ(e) = 



1, e = 1 ,

(−1) r, e is a product of r distinct primes ,

0, e is divisible by the square of a prime .

Then ℓn(j) is the dimension of the homogeneous degree-j component of the free Lie algebra 

37 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

on n generators, by Witt’s formula [36]. Consequently, 

dim K(k)Ψ (S) ≤ min 

(

d, s 

> k

X

> j=1

ℓn(j)

)

,

where K(k)Ψ is our Krylov-Lie subspace of Definition 3.2.8. Proof. The grade-k Krylov–Lie subspace is spanned by the vectors w(ψa), where w ranges over all Lie words in the n generators of bracket depth at most k, and a = 1 , . . . , s . Modulo the universal Lie identities, the space of formal Lie words of homogeneous degree j has dimension ℓn(j) by Witt’s formula [36]. Therefore, for each fixed seed vector ψa, there are at most Pkj=1 ℓn(j) linearly independent word evaluations w(ψa). Summing over the m seed vectors and using that K(k)Ψ (S) ⊆ H ∼= Cd, we obtain dim K(k)Ψ (S) ≤ min 

(

d, s 

> k

X

> j=1

ℓn(j)

)

.

Corollary 3.4.12 (Universal KLA upper bound from Witt’s formula) . Let Ψ ∈ H s \ { 0},let k ≥ 1, and set 

r(k)Ψ := dim K(k)Ψ (S),

where K(k)Ψ is the Krylov-Lie subspace of Definition 3.2.8. Then 

dim l(k)Ψ (S) ≤ (r(k)Ψ )2,

where l(k)Ψ is the Krylov-Lie algebra of Definition 3.2.9, and more loosely, 

dim l(k)Ψ (S) ≤ min 

(

d2,



s

> k

X

> j=1

ℓn(j)

2

)

,

where 

ℓn(j) = 1

j

X

> e|j

μ(e) nj/e 

is given by Witt’s formula for the free Lie algebra on n generators [36]. Proof. Immediate from Proposition 3.4.11. 38 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

## CHAPTER 4 APPROXIMATION OF THE REACHABLE MANIFOLD 

At last, we finally have erected all the requisite architecture to characterize the quality of KLG approximations to the reachable manifolds, especially for the dimension-matched case. However, we must take care to not prematurely disqualify of lower-dimensional KLG approximations, as they may give valuable insights of their own: when a lower-dimensional KLG is measure-faithful, the corresponding comparison map will generically be a submersion rather than a local diffeomorphism, and therefore the reachable manifold contains local fiber directions invisible to the effective Lie-group geometry. This is suggestive of a notion of geometric redundancy that may be relevant for ansatz design and trainability. With that acknowledgement complete, we will begin by proving some helpful lemmas to investigate the properties of dimension-reduced and dimension-matched Krylov-Lie approximations to a reachable manifold. 

## 4.1 Preparatory Lemmas 

Lemma 4.1.1 (Analytic Jacobian rank criterion) . Let M be the m-dimensional smooth reachable manifold of a VQA (Equation 2.1), equipped with 

μM = q d vol M , q ∈ L1(M ), q ≥ 0.

Let K(k)Ψ be a depth-k represented Krylov-Lie group (Definition 3.2.12) of dimension 

ml := dim K(k)Ψ = dim l(k)Ψ ≤ m, 

associated to the depth-k Krylov-Lie algebra l(k)Ψ (Definition 3.2.9), and realized in U (d) by projectors onto our subspace (Definition 3.2.6) as follows: 

ι(k)Ψ (U ) = P (k)Ψ U P (k)Ψ + I − P (k)Ψ .

Let 

Φ(k)Ψ : M → K(k)Ψ

39 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

be a comparison map. Fix a smooth chart (U, x 1, . . . , x m) on M , and further choose a basis 

X1, . . . , X ml of l(k)Ψ . Define the projected Jacobian matrix 

A(x) = ( Aαβ (x)) ∈ Mat ml×m(R)

by 

LΦ(k)Ψ (x)−1



> ∗

∂Φ(k)Ψ

∂x β (x)

!

=

> ml

X

> α=1

Aαβ (x) dι (k)Ψ (Xα), β = 1 , . . . , m, 

where 



LΦ(k)Ψ (x)−1



> ∗

(·) denotes the pushforward of the left-translation map by the group el-ement Φ(k)Ψ (x)−1 . Assume that the entries of A(x) are real-analytic on U . If there exists 

x0 ∈ U such that 

rank A(x0) = ml,

then the full-rank locus 

Ufull := {x ∈ U | rank dΦ(k)Ψ,x = ml}

is a nonempty open subset of U , and U \ Ufull has Lebesgue measure zero in local coordinates. In particular, rank dΦ(k)Ψ,x = ml for μM -almost every x ∈ U .Hence: 1. if ml < m , then Φ(k)Ψ is a submersion on Ufull ;2. if ml = m, then Φ(k)Ψ is a local diffeomorphism on Ufull .Consequently, if M admits a finite atlas ( M is compact) by such charts, for which the corresponding rank-drop loci are μM -null, then 

rank dΦ(k)Ψ,x = dim K(k)Ψ for μM -a.e. x ∈ M. 

Therefore, by Theorem 3.1.1, the singular component in the Lebesgue–Radon–Nikodym de-composition of (Φ (k)Ψ )∗μM with respect to Haar measure on K(k)Ψ vanishes. Proof. Because K(k)Ψ is realized in the ambient unitary group through 

ι(k)Ψ (U ) = P (k)Ψ U P (k)Ψ + I − P (k)Ψ ,

its tangent space at the identity is represented by 

dι (k)Ψ (l(k)Ψ ) ⊆ u(d).

40 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Since dι (k)Ψ : l(k)Ψ → TeK(k)Ψ is the differential of the representing homomorphism, the vectors 

dι (k)Ψ (X1), . . . , dι (k)Ψ (Xml )form a basis of TeK(k)Ψ .For each x ∈ U , left translation by Φ (k)Ψ (x)−1 identifies TΦ(k)Ψ (x)K(k)Ψ with TeK(k)Ψ . Thus 

dΦ(k)Ψ,x : TxM → TΦ(k)Ψ (x)K(k)Ψ has rank ml if and only if the vectors 



LΦ(k)Ψ (x)−1



> ∗

∂Φ(k)Ψ

∂x β (x)

!

, β = 1 , . . . , m, 

span TeK(k)Ψ . By definition of A(x), this is equivalent to rank A(x) = ml.

Hence 

Ufull = {x ∈ U | rank A(x) = ml}.

Since rank A(x0) = ml, some ml × ml minor ∆( x) of A(x) satisfies ∆( x0)̸ = 0 .

Because the entries of A(x) are nontrivial real-analytic and ∆( x) is not identically zero, ∆( x)too is nontrivial real-analytic. Therefore ∆ is not identically zero on U , and its nonvanishing locus 

U∆ := {x ∈ U | ∆( x)̸ = 0 }

is a nonempty open subset of U . Moreover, U∆ ⊆ Ufull , so Ufull is nonempty. To see that 

Ufull is open, writing Z as the finite index set of all ml × ml minors of A(x) associated with some size-ml subset of columns, and for z ∈ Z letting ∆ z denote the corresponding minor, we have 

U \ Ufull = \

> z∈Z

{x ∈ U | ∆z (x) = 0 },

which is closed as a finite intersection of closed sets (each ∆ z is real-analytic, thus continuous, and in turn the preimage of the closed singleton {0} for any such ∆ z must be closed). Hence 

Ufull is open as the complement of a closed set in U .On the other hand, 

U \ Ufull ⊆ { x ∈ U | ∆( x) = 0 }.

41 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Since the zero set of a nontrivial real-analytic function has Lebesgue measure zero in local coordinates, U \ Ufull is coordinate-Lebesgue null. Because μM = q d vol M is absolutely continuous with respect to the smooth volume measure, it follows that U \ Ufull is also 

μM -null. Thus rank dΦ(k)Ψ,x = ml for μM -a.e. x ∈ U. 

If ml < m , surjectivity of dΦ(k)Ψ,x means exactly that Φ (k)Ψ is a submersion at x [31, Ch. 4]. If ml = m, then dΦ(k)Ψ,x : TxM → TΦ(k)Ψ (x)K(k)Ψ is a linear map between vector spaces of equal dimension, so rank m means invertibility; by the inverse function theorem, Φ (k)Ψ is then a local diffeomorphism at x. This proves the two cases. Finally, if M is covered by a finite atlas (again, M is compact) of such charts and the union of the rank-drop loci is μM -null, then rank dΦ(k)Ψ,x = dim K(k)Ψ for μM -a.e. x ∈ M. 

The last claim is then an immediate application of Theorem 3.1.1. 

Proposition 4.1.2 (Canonical circuit lift satisfies the analytic Jacobian hypothesis) . Let 

M be the m-dimensional smooth reachable manifold of a VQA, equipped with 

μM = q d vol M , q ∈ L1(M ), q ≥ 0.

Let K(k)Ψ be a depth-k represented Krylov-Lie group (Definition 3.2.12) of dimension 

ml := dim K(k)Ψ = dim l(k)Ψ ≤ m, 

associated to the depth-k Krylov–Lie algebra l(k)Ψ (Definition 3.2.9), and realized in U (d) by by projectors onto our subspace (Definition 3.2.6): 

ι(k)Ψ (U ) = P (k)Ψ U P (k)Ψ + I − P (k)Ψ .

Fix a chart (U, x 1, . . . , x m) on M . Assume that on U the reachable manifold is described by a circuit with fixed Hermitian generators H1, . . . , H n and real-analytic parameter functions 

θ1, . . . , θ p : U → R, so that the corresponding circuit unitary is, for il ∈ { 1, . . . , n } and 

1 ≤ l ≤ p,

U(x) = eiθ p(x)Hip · · · eiθ 1(x)Hi1 .

Let 

eH(k) 

> j

:= P (k)Ψ Hj P (k)Ψ K(k)Ψ

∈ End( K(k)Ψ ), j = 1 , . . . , n, 

42 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

and assume that 

eH(k) 

> j

∈ l(k)Ψ for all j = 1 , . . . , n. 

Define the canonical depth-k comparison map 

κ(k)Ψ : U → K(k)Ψ

by 

κ(k)Ψ (x) := eiθ p(x) eH(k) 

> ip

· · · eiθ 1(x) eH(k) 

> i1

.

Then κ(k)Ψ is well-defined and real-analytic. Moreover, if X1, . . . , X ml is any basis of l(k)Ψ ,and if A(x) = ( Aαβ (x)) ∈ Mat ml×m(R) (Lemma 4.1.1) is defined by 



Lκ(k)Ψ (x)−1



> ∗

∂κ (k)Ψ

∂x β (x)

!

=

> ml

X

> α=1

Aαβ (x) dι (k)Ψ (Xα), β = 1 , . . . , m, 

then every entry Aαβ (x) is real-analytic on U .Consequently, if there exists x0 ∈ U such that 

rank dκ (k)Ψ,x 0 = ml,

then the full-rank locus 

Ufull := {x ∈ U | rank dκ (k)Ψ,x = ml}

is a nonempty open subset of U , and U \ Ufull has μM -measure zero. Hence: 1. if ml < m , then κ(k)Ψ is a submersion on Ufull ;2. if ml = m, then κ(k)Ψ is a local diffeomorphism on Ufull ;3. if ml = m and κ(k)Ψ is injective on Ufull , then 

κ(k)Ψ : Ufull → κ(k)Ψ (Ufull )

is a diffeomorphism; 4. if in addition κ(k)Ψ (Ufull ) = K(k)Ψ , then κ(k)Ψ is a diffeomorphism from Ufull onto K(k)Ψ .Proof. Because eH(k) 

> j

∈ l(k)Ψ for every j, each one-parameter subgroup 

t 7 → eit eH(k)

> j

43 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

lies in K(k)Ψ . Since K(k)Ψ is a group, the product 

κ(k)Ψ (x) = eiθ p(x) eH(k) 

> ip

· · · eiθ 1(x) eH(k)

> i1

also lies in K(k)Ψ for every x ∈ U . Thus κ(k)Ψ is well-defined. Each entry of eiθ j (x) eH(k) 

> j

is real-analytic in x, because the matrix exponential is real-analytic and θj (x) is real-analytic. Therefore κ(k)Ψ , being a finite product of such matrix-valued real-analytic maps, is itself real-analytic. Write 

Gj (x) := eiθ j (x) eH(k) 

> j

, κ(k)Ψ (x) = Gp(x) · · · G1(x).

Since eH(k) 

> j

commutes with its own exponential, 

∂G j

∂x β (x) =  ∂β θj (x) i eH(k) 

> ij

Gj (x).

Differentiating the product gives 

∂κ (k)Ψ

∂x β (x) = 

> p

X

> r=1

Gp(x) · · · Gr+1 (x)  ∂β θr(x)i eH(k) 

> ir

Gr(x) · · · G1(x).

Left-translating to the identity yields 



Lκ(k)Ψ (x)−1



> ∗

∂κ (k)Ψ

∂x β (x)

!

=

> p

X

> r=1

 ∂β θr(x) Ad (Gr−1(x)··· G1(x)) −1

 i eH(k)

> ir

.

Each term on the right-hand side depends real-analytically on x, since it is obtained from the real-analytic maps Gj (x) by matrix multiplication and inversion inside the unitary group. Hence the left-translated tangent vector is a real-analytic l(k)Ψ -valued map. Expanding in the fixed basis X1, . . . , X ml (each term of the sum is in the Lie algebra since the adjoint action of Lie group elements preserves the Lie algebra), we conclude that every coefficient Aαβ (x)is real-analytic on U .Thus κ(k)Ψ satisfies the hypotheses of Lemma 4.1.1. If there exists x0 ∈ U with rank dκ (k)Ψ,x 0 = ml,

then the full-rank locus Ufull is nonempty and open, and its complement is μM -null. On Ufull ,the map is therefore a submersion when ml < m , and a local diffeomorphism when ml = m

[31, Thms. 4.5 and 4.12]. If ml = m and κ(k)Ψ is injective on Ufull , then a bijective local diffeomorphism onto its 44 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

image is a diffeomorphism onto that image [31, Ch. 4]. If, moreover, κ(k)Ψ (Ufull ) = K(k)Ψ , then 

κ(k)Ψ is a diffeomorphism from Ufull onto K(k)Ψ [31, Ch. 4]. 

## 4.2 The Krylov-Lie Approximation Theorem and Related Results 

Theorem 4.2.1 (Compact, Full-Rank Krylov–Lie Approximation of Reachable Manifolds) .

Let M be the m-dimensional smooth reachable manifold of a variational quantum algorithm, equipped with the finite measure 

μM = q d vol M , q ∈ C1(M ), q ≥ 0.

Fix a commutator depth k ≥ 1, a block size s ≥ 1, and a finite Hermitian generator set 

S = {H1, . . . , H n} ⊂ End( H), where H ∼= Cd (see Definition 3.2.1 and Definition 3.2.9). Let 

Σs := (ψ1, . . . , ψ s) ∈ H s ∥ψj ∥ = 1 for all j

denote the compact unit-norm block-seed space. For each Ψ ∈ Σs, let K(k)Ψ denote the associated depth-k Krylov–Lie subspace of Defini-tion 3.2.8, let l(k)Ψ denote the associated depth-k Krylov–Lie algebra of Definition 3.2.9, and let K(k)Ψ denote the corresponding represented compact Krylov–Lie group of Definition 3.2.12. Set 

r(Ψ) := dim K(k)Ψ (S), ℓ(Ψ) := dim l(k)Ψ (S).

Fix integers r, ℓ and suppose the seed stratum 

Yr,ℓ := {Ψ ∈ Σs | r(Ψ) = r, ℓ (Ψ) = ℓ}

is nonempty. Assume moreover that ℓ ≤ m, and that on Yr,ℓ there is given, for each Ψ, a canonical comparison map 

κ(k)Ψ : M −→ K(k)Ψ

of the form constructed in Proposition 4.1.2, so that in local coordinates its Jacobian coeffi-cients are real-analytic. Additionally, assume there exists Ψ0 ∈ Yr,ℓ such that, on each chart of some finite atlas of M , the corresponding rank test from Lemma 4.1.1 is passed at least once for κ(k)Ψ0 .Let D1, . . . , D N denote the finite family of determinantal minors from §3.4 that cut out the constant-dimension seed stratum Yr,ℓ . Then there exists δ > 0 such that the δ-nondegenerate 

45 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

substratum 

Gδr,ℓ := Ψ ∈ Yr,ℓ |Dj (Ψ) | ≥ δ for all j = 1 , . . . , N 

is nonempty and compact. Every Ψ ∈ G δr,ℓ has the same dimension data (r, ℓ ), and for every such Ψ the following hold. 1. Define the full-rank locus 

Mfull (Ψ) := {x ∈ M | rank( dκ (k)Ψ,x ) = ℓ}.

Then Mfull (Ψ) is open and μM (M \ Mfull (Ψ)) = 0 .2. For every compact subset 

C ⊂ Mfull (Ψ) ,

the rank condition is uniform on C: after possibly shrinking each chart intersecting C,some ℓ × ℓ Jacobian minor of κ(k)Ψ is continuous and uniformly bounded away from zero on the corresponding portion of C.3. If ℓ < m , then κ(k)Ψ |C is a submersion at every point of C.4. If ℓ = m, then κ(k)Ψ |C is a local diffeomorphism at every point of C. If, in addition, 

κ(k)Ψ |C is injective, then 

κ(k)Ψ |C : C −→ κ(k)Ψ (C)

is a diffeomorphism onto its image. 5. Let μK(k)Ψ

denote Haar probability measure on K(k)Ψ . Then the pushforward measure 

ν(k)Ψ,C := ( κ(k)Ψ )∗(μM |C )

is absolutely continuous with respect to μK(k)Ψ

, and admits a unique Radon–Nikodym derivative 

ρ(k)Ψ,C := dν (k)Ψ,C 

dμ K(k)Ψ

∈ L1(K(k)Ψ , μ K(k)Ψ

).

Moreover, ρ(k)Ψ,C has a representative given locally by the sheet-sum/coarea formula which is differentiable on the open set 

κ(k)Ψ (C◦) \ κ(k)Ψ (∂C ),

46 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

where C◦ and ∂C denote the interior and boundary of C relative to M , and bounded on κ(k)Ψ (C). If, in addition, C is saturated with respect to κ(k)Ψ in the sense that 

C =  κ(k)Ψ

−1(D) for some compact D ⊂ K(k)Ψ ,

so that C is a union of whole fibers of κ(k)Ψ , then ρ(k)Ψ,C is differentiable, bounded, and Lipschitz on all of κ(k)Ψ (C).6. Let U : M → U (d) denote the original circuit map as in Proposition 4.1.2, and let 

ι(k)Ψ : K(k)Ψ ,→ U (d)

denote the represented embedding. Define the compact-subset uniform approximation error by 

EC (k ; Ψ) := sup 

> x∈C

U(x) − ι(k)Ψ (κ(k)Ψ (x)) HS .

Then EC is continuous on Gδr,ℓ . Consequently, since Gδr,ℓ is compact, EC attains its minimum on Gδr,ℓ . In particular, there exists an optimal seed 

Ψ∗ 

> C

∈ G δr,ℓ 

minimizing EC among all seeds in that admissible set. 7. For every bounded Lipschitz observable F : U (d) → R,

Z

> C

F (U(x)) dμ M (x) −

Z

> K(k)Ψ

F (ι(k)Ψ (g)) ρ(k)Ψ,C (g) dμ K(k)Ψ

(g) ≤ Lip( F ) μM (C) EC (k ; Ψ) .

Hence, on every compact subset of the full-rank locus, the represented Krylov–Lie group gives a geometrically faithful and measure-faithful approximation to the origi-nal reachable-manifold integrals. Proof. The proof is a synthesis of the seed-stratification results from Section 3.4, the analytic Jacobian criterion of Lemma 4.1.1, the canonical circuit-lift construction of Proposition 4.1.2, and the Radon–Nikodym framework from Theorem 3.1.1. First, because Yr,ℓ ̸ = ∅, the constructibility and genericity results of Theorem 3.4.9 show that the locus of seeds having fixed Krylov-subspace dimension r and fixed Krylov– Lie algebra dimension ℓ contains a nonempty relatively Zariski-open subset of its natural support. Equivalently, if D1, . . . , D N are the finitely many determinantal minors from §3.4 47 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

cutting out the constant-dimension stratum, then there exists Ψ ◦ ∈ Yr,ℓ such that Dj (Ψ ◦)̸ = 0 for all j. Set 

δ := 12 min  

> 1≤j≤N

|Dj (Ψ ◦)| > 0.

Then Ψ ◦ ∈ G δr,ℓ , so Gδr,ℓ is nonempty. Since each Dj is continuous on the compact unit-norm seed domain Σ s, the set 

Gδr,ℓ = Ψ ∈ Yr,ℓ |Dj (Ψ) | ≥ δ for all j

is closed in Σ s, hence compact. Now fix Ψ ∈ G δr,ℓ . By Proposition 4.1.2, the comparison map κ(k)Ψ is real-analytic in local coordinates and satisfies the analytic Jacobian hypothesis of Lemma 4.1.1. By assumption, the finite rank test is passed on each chart of a finite atlas, so Lemma 4.1.1 implies that the full-rank locus 

Mfull (Ψ) = {x ∈ M | rank( dκ (k)Ψ,x ) = ℓ}

is open and has complement of μM -measure zero. This proves (1). Next, let C ⊂ Mfull (Ψ) be compact. For each x ∈ C, choose a chart Vx containing x

and an ℓ × ℓ Jacobian minor of κ(k)Ψ that is nonzero at x. By continuity, after shrinking 

Vx if necessary, the same minor remains nonzero on Vx ∩ C. Since C is compact, finitely many such chart neighborhoods cover C. On each of these finitely many chart pieces, the corresponding minor is continuous on a compact set and therefore its absolute value attains a positive minimum there. This proves the uniform rank condition in (2). Statement (3) is immediate: if ℓ < m , then full rank of dκ (k)Ψ,x means surjectivity onto the 

ℓ-dimensional tangent space of K(k)Ψ , so κ(k)Ψ |C is a submersion at every point of C. Likewise, if ℓ = m, then dκ (k)Ψ,x is an isomorphism at every point of C, so the inverse function theorem implies that κ(k)Ψ |C is a local diffeomorphism at every point of C, proving the first part of (4). If in addition κ(k)Ψ |C is injective, then the restriction 

κ(k)Ψ |C : C → κ(k)Ψ (C)is a continuous bijection from a compact space to a Hausdorff space, hence a homeomorphism. Since it is already a local diffeomorphism, its inverse is continuously differentiable in local coordinates; on overlaps, by injectivity (the global inverse must be well-defined), these local inverses must agree, so they glue to a single continuously differentiable inverse on the image. Therefore κ(k)Ψ |C is a diffeomorphism onto its image. This proves (4). For (5), since μM (M \ Mfull (Ψ)) = 0, Theorem 3.1.1 implies that the singular component in the Lebesgue–Radon–Nikodym decomposition of ( κ(k)Ψ )∗μM with respect to Haar measure 48 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

on K(k)Ψ vanishes. Restricting to C preserves absolute continuity, so 

ν(k)Ψ,C := ( κ(k)Ψ )∗(μM |C ) ≪ μK(k)Ψ

.

Hence the Radon–Nikodym derivative ρ(k)Ψ,C exists and is unique μK(k)Ψ

-almost everywhere. To obtain a regular representative, use the finite chart cover from (2). On each chart piece, the relevant ℓ × ℓ Jacobian minor is bounded below away from zero. If ℓ = m, the inverse function theorem gives the usual finite sheet-sum formula for the pushforward density; if ℓ < m , the corresponding coarea formula gives the density by integration over the fibers. On the open set 

κ(k)Ψ (C◦) \ κ(k)Ψ (∂C ),

only interior sheets contribute, and the local fiber multiplicity is locally constant. Since 

q ∈ C1(M ) and the Jacobian minor is uniformly bounded below on each chart piece, differ-entiation under the integral is legitimate there. It follows that ρ(k)Ψ,C has a representative that is differentiable on κ(k)Ψ (C◦) \ κ(k)Ψ (∂C ). The same local formulas, together with compactness of C, show that this representative is bounded on κ(k)Ψ (C). Next, if C is saturated with respect to κ(k)Ψ , say C =  κ(k)Ψ

−1(D) for some compact set 

D ⊂ K(k)Ψ , then no fiber is truncated by the source-side boundary: for every g ∈ κ(k)Ψ (C), 

 κ(k)Ψ

−1(g) ∩ C =  κ(k)Ψ

−1(g).

Thus, on κ(k)Ψ (C), the sheet-sum/coarea formula involves complete fibers only, rather than fibers cut off by ∂C . Because Mfull (Ψ) is open and C ⊂ Mfull (Ψ) is compact, there exists an open neighborhood W ⊂ Mfull (Ψ) of C with compact closure W ⊂ Mfull (Ψ). Applying the argument above to W in place of C, and shrinking charts if necessary, we obtain an atlas on which the relevant ℓ × ℓ Jacobian minor of κ(k)Ψ is continuous and uniformly bounded away from zero on each chart piece meeting W . On each such chart, the same sheet-sum/coarea formulas, with integration over entire fibers, define a function eρ that is C1 on an open neighborhood V of κ(k)Ψ (C) in K(k)Ψ . By construction, eρ = ρ(k)Ψ,C almost everywhere on κ(k)Ψ (C). Because eρ is C1 on V , its derivative is continuous on V , and since κ(k)Ψ (C) is compact, the derivative is bounded on κ(k)Ψ (C). It follows that eρ is bounded and Lipschitz on κ(k)Ψ (C). Thus ρ(k)Ψ,C admits a representative that is differentiable, bounded, and Lipschitz on all of 

κ(k)Ψ (C), proving (5). For (6), on any constant-dimension seed stratum the basis-selection and compressed-generator constructions vary algebraically or rationally with the seed by Lemma 3.4.7, and the represented circuit lift from Proposition 4.1.2 therefore depends continuously on the seed. 49 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Hence 

EC (k ; Ψ) = sup 

> x∈C

∥U (x) − ι(k)Ψ (κ(k)Ψ (x)) ∥HS 

is continuous on Gδr,ℓ . Because Gδr,ℓ is compact, the extreme-value theorem yields existence of a minimizer Ψ∗ 

> C

∈ G δr,ℓ .

This proves (6). Finally, for (7), let F : U (d) → R be bounded and Lipschitz. Then 

Z

> C

F (U(x)) dμ M (x)−

Z

> C

F (ι(k)Ψ (κ(k)Ψ (x))) dμ M (x) ≤

Z

> C

F (U(x)) −F (ι(k)Ψ (κ(k)Ψ (x))) dμ M (x).

By the Lipschitz property of F ,

F (U(x)) − F (ι(k)Ψ (κ(k)Ψ (x))) ≤ Lip( F ) ∥U (x) − ι(k)Ψ (κ(k)Ψ (x)) ∥HS ≤ Lip( F ) EC (k ; Ψ) .

Integrating over C gives 

Z

> C

F (U(x)) dμ M (x) −

Z

> C

F (ι(k)Ψ (κ(k)Ψ (x))) dμ M (x) ≤ Lip( F ) μM (C) EC (k ; Ψ) .

By definition of the pushforward measure and extending by zero on K(k)Ψ \ κ(k)Ψ (C), 

Z

> C

F (ι(k)Ψ (κ(k)Ψ (x))) dμ M (x) = 

Z

> K(k)Ψ

F (ι(k)Ψ (g)) dν (k)Ψ,C (g),

and since ν(k)Ψ,C ≪ μK(k)Ψ

,

Z

> K(k)Ψ

F (ι(k)Ψ (g)) dν (k)Ψ,C (g) = 

Z

> K(k)Ψ

F (ι(k)Ψ (g)) ρ(k)Ψ,C (g) dμ K(k)Ψ

(g).

Combining these identities proves (7), and therefore the theorem. 

Remark 4.2.2 (Interpretation and uses of the Krylov–Lie approximation theorem) . Theo-rem 4.2.1 is the main structural result linking the geometric Krylov–Lie construction to the statistical behaviour of finite-depth variational quantum algorithms. It says, roughly, that on suitable compact regions of parameter space, the original circuit ensemble can be approx-imated by a finite-dimensional represented Krylov–Lie group equipped with Haar measure and a well-behaved Radon–Nikodym density. The approximation enters only through the replacement of the true circuit map by its Krylov–Lie surrogate; all measure-theoretic state-50 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

ments on the Krylov–Lie group are exact for that surrogate. There are several layers to this statement. 

(1) Depth-aware Lie-group surrogate. For a fixed commutator depth k and seed block size 

s, the construction of l(k)Ψ and K(k)Ψ attaches to each seed block Ψ a finite-dimensional Lie algebra and a compact Lie group that encode the order-k expressive content of the ansatz. On the nondegenerate seed substratum Gδr,ℓ , the dimension data ( r, ℓ ) are constant and the comparison map 

κ(k)Ψ : M → K(k)Ψ

has real-analytic Jacobian. Items (1)–(4) of the theorem say that, for such seeds, there is an open full-measure locus Mfull (Ψ) ⊂ M on which κ(k)Ψ has constant full rank ℓ, and that on any compact subset C ⊂ Mfull (Ψ) the map behaves like a submersion (or a local diffeomorphism when ℓ = m). Thus, locally on Mfull (Ψ), the reachable manifold admits a depth-k Lie-group model of controlled dimension. 

(2) Separating geometric approximation from sampling. The theorem cleanly separates geo-metric approximation from sampling effects. The geometric error is quantified by 

EC (k; Ψ) = sup 

> x∈C

U(x) − ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x)

> HS

,

which measures how well the represented Krylov–Lie circuit ι(k)Ψ ◦ κ(k)Ψ reproduces the original circuit map U on the chosen compact set C. By compactness of the nondegenerate seed substratum, this error can be minimized over admissible seeds, yielding an “optimal” Krylov– Lie surrogate for the ansatz on C.Sampling effects are encoded in item (5): the reachable-manifold measure μM |C is pushed forward by the comparison map κ(k)Ψ to a measure on K(k)Ψ that is absolutely continuous with respect to Haar measure and admits a Radon–Nikodym density ρ(k)Ψ,C . By definition of the pushforward and the Radon–Nikodym derivative, for any integrable F : U (d) → R one has the exact identity 

Z

> K(k)Ψ

F  ι(k)Ψ (g) ρ(k)Ψ,C (g) dμ K(k)Ψ

(g) = 

Z

> C

F  ι(k)Ψ (κ(k)Ψ (x))  dμ M (x).

Thus all deviations from Haar randomness at finite depth are captured in a single scalar density on the represented Krylov–Lie group, and all moment and variance formulas on K(k)Ψ

are exact for the surrogate circuit ι(k)Ψ ◦ κ(k)Ψ . When these formulas are used to describe the original circuit U , one must additionally account for the geometric approximation error 

EC (k; Ψ), as quantified in item (7) of the theorem. 51 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

(3) Locality on the regular part of the reachable manifold. A key feature is that the theorem is local on the regular part of the reachable manifold. One does not require κ(k)Ψ to have full rank everywhere on M ; it is enough that the full-rank locus Mfull (Ψ) be open and of full 

μM -measure. The theorem then applies on any compact subset C ⊂ Mfull (Ψ), even if the global geometry or singularity structure of M is complicated. In practice, this means that the analysis can focus on large, well-behaved regions of parameter space without needing global control. This is important because it allows one to make useful, quantitative statements about the global measure-theoretic behaviour of the ansatz by working on compact regions where the Krylov–Lie surrogate is well behaved and the approximation error EC (k; Ψ) is small. 

(4) Saturated compact sets and regularity of the density. For general compact C ⊂ Mfull (Ψ), the density ρ(k)Ψ,C is obtained locally from the sheet-sum or coarea formulas and is differentiable away from the image of the boundary κ(k)Ψ (∂C ). In many applications, however, one would like a density that is as regular as possible on all of κ(k)Ψ (C). The theorem isolates an additional hypothesis on C under which this holds: if C is saturated with respect to κ(k)Ψ , i.e. 

C =  κ(k)Ψ

−1 κ(k)Ψ (C),

equivalently if C is a union of whole fibers of κ(k)Ψ , then no fiber is truncated by the boundary of C. In this situation the same sheet-sum/coarea formulas extend across the entire image of 

C, and the Radon–Nikodym density admits a representative that is differentiable, bounded, and Lipschitz on κ(k)Ψ (C). This yields a particularly well-conditioned finite-dimensional sur-rogate: a compact region of the represented Krylov–Lie group equipped with Haar measure and a Lipschitz weight. In many realistic ansatz families the entire KLG may not be as regular as such compact saturated regions, so depending on context one may actually prefer to work on these regions and accept a potentially worse approximation error as a price for improved conditioning. 

(5) Applications and choice of comparison map. Taken together, these properties make The-orem 4.2.1 the main technical bridge between the original VQA ensemble and the practical application of the Krylov–Lie framework developed later in the thesis. It justifies replac-ing the reachable manifold by a depth-aware compact Lie-group surrogate on large regular regions, optimizing over seeds to minimize the geometric error EC (k; Ψ), and performing sub-sequent moment, variance, and convergence analyses directly on K(k)Ψ with respect to Haar measure reweighted by ρ(k)Ψ,C . For the purposes of this work, we often focus on situations where a single, globally faithful Krylov–Lie model is available, but the theorem also makes clear that one may in principle consider alternative comparison maps κ or even families of 52 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

maps (arising from different seeds or depths) to obtain better pushforward surrogates for a given observable or region. In all cases, the resulting KLG-based formulas should be un-derstood as exact for the chosen surrogate ensemble and as approximations to the original ansatz whose quality is governed explicitly by EC (k; Ψ). 

Remark 4.2.3 (Multiple Krylov–Lie charts and reconstruction of the ansatz measure) . The comparison map κ(k)Ψ : M → K(k)Ψ and represented Krylov–Lie group K(k)Ψ provide a single “chart” on the reachable manifold, together with a pushforward measure whose Radon– Nikodym density ρ(k)Ψ,C records the sampling distortion of the surrogate circuit on C. In general, this chart is only an approximation in the sense discussed in Remark 4.2.2. In the ideal case where dim M = dim K(k)Ψ and κ(k)Ψ |C : C → κ(k)Ψ (C) is a diffeomorphism onto its image, the situation is substantially better. Treating dμ K(k)Ψ

as the volume measure on K(k)Ψ , the Radon–Nikodym derivative simplifies to the standard change-of-variables form 

ρ(k)Ψ,C (g) = d(κ(k)Ψ )∗(μM |C )

dμ K(k)Ψ

(g) = q (κ(k)Ψ )−1(g) det d(κ(k)Ψ )−1 

> g

, g ∈ κ(k)Ψ (C),

and we extend ρ(k)Ψ,C by zero outside κ(k)Ψ (C). With this convention, for every integrable 

F : M → R we obtain the exact formula 

Z

> C

F (U ) dμ M (U ) = 

Z

> K(k)Ψ

F  (κ(k)Ψ )−1(g) ρ(k)Ψ,C (g) dμ K(k)Ψ

(g).

Thus, in this dimension-matched, diffeomorphism-onto-its-image setting, the comparison map genuinely transfers integrals from the reachable manifold to the Krylov–Lie group via a Radon–Nikodym density that is explicitly computable from the Jacobian of κ(k)Ψ and the original sampling density q on M .A natural question is whether one can use multiple seeds and depths to obtain a family of comparison maps 

κ(kj )Ψj : M → K(kj )Ψj , j ∈ J, 

where J is an index set, whose associated pushforward measures collectively determine the original reachable-manifold measure μM (or the law of the circuit map U). Such a family would play the role of an atlas of Krylov–Lie charts: each map probes the geometry and sampling law along a different finite-depth projection, and one might hope to reconstruct global information about ( M, μ M ) from the collection of pushforwards, in analogy with how tomographic methods reconstruct a function from its integrals along many directions. In the dimension-matched, diffeomorphic regime above, this tomographic picture becomes partic-ularly concrete, because each chart admits an exact Radon–Nikodym formula for integrals 53 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

over its image, so one can in principle reconstruct the restriction of the ansatz measure to 

C from an integral equation on κ(k)Ψ (C) ⊂ K(k)Ψ .Making this idea rigorous would require quantitative invertibility of the joint forward operator 

x 7 −→  κ(kj )Ψj (x) 

> j∈J

,

for some family of comparison maps indexed by J, together with control of the associated Radon–Nikodym densities. In favorable cases, one could imagine that an appropriate family of Krylov–Lie groups suffices to recover the original ansatz measure (or at least its low-order moments) by solving an inverse problem on the corresponding product space Q 

> j∈J

K(kj )Ψj .However, we have not shown that one can construct enough such dimension-matched dif-feomorphic charts in typical VQA settings to compute integrals over the entire reachable manifold in this way. For this reason, we do not use these exact formulas in the remainder of the thesis, and we treat the tomography interpretation as a speculative but nonetheless intriguing direction for future work, analogous in spirit to using multiple coordinate charts or tomographic projections to recover a global geometric or probabilistic object. 

Remark 4.2.4 (Krylov-Lie groups and Lietic spaces) . The Krylov-Lie charts and atlases discussed in Remark 4.2.3 propound a broader notion of a manifold-like space that is modeled locally on Lie groups rather than Euclidean geometry. Informally, one may say that a second-countable Hausdorff space L is a Lietic space if it is locally diffeomorphic to finite-dimensional Lie groups: that is, if it admits an open cover {Uα}α∈A and diffeomorphisms 

ϕα : Uα → Vα ⊂ Gα,

where each Gα is a finite-dimensional Lie group, such that the transition maps 

ϕβ ◦ ϕ−1 

> α

: ϕα(Uα ∩ Uβ ) → ϕβ (Uα ∩ Uβ )are smooth diffeomorphisms between open subsets of Lie groups. Every smooth manifold is automatically Lietic through Euclidean charts regarded as charts into the additive Lie group ( Rn, +). Additionally, every Lietic space is a smooth manifold, since being locally diffeomorphic to a Lie group implies being locally diffeomorphic to Rn by composing the local Lie-group charts with Euclidean charts on the Lie groups themselves. The point of this terminology is not to enlarge the class of underlying spaces, but to emphasize a preferred local group structure and the role of Haar measures and Lie-algebraic data in local analysis. From this perspective, the present Krylov–Lie program can respectably be thought of 54 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

as an attempt to approximate objects (VQA circuits) that are essentially layer-indexed Lie semigroupoids of admissible partial circuits—concretely, subsemigroupoids of Free(0 → 1 →· · · → L) × S, the product of the free semigroupoid (or free category, if we include units) on the linear quiver of layer boundaries with an ambient Lie semigroup S, whose morphisms are the layer-tagged partial circuits and where composition is inherited from the multiplication of S, defined whenever the layer data are compatible (the more classical name for such an object, emphasizing the presence of units, would be a Lie category [20])—with such local Lie group charts. The comparison maps κ(k)Ψ provide Lietic charts on the reachable manifold, and the associated pushforward measures describe how the ansatz measure appears in these local coordinates. Under auspicious circumstances (for example, on compact, dimension-matched, full-rank subsets where κ(k)Ψ is a diffeomorphism onto its image), the corresponding Radon– Nikodym densities admit exact change-of-variables formulas, so integrals over the reachable manifold can be computed directly on Krylov–Lie groups with Haar measures. One can then view this Lietic picture as a means of avoiding many of the technical difficulties of integrating directly over Lie semigroups or semigroupoids, especially in an invariant fashion [5, 20, 21]: integration and long-time behavior can be analyzed in convenient local Lie group models with their Lie algebras, with the semigroup/semigroupoid dynamics entering through the choice of charts and their overlaps rather than through a single global Haar-like structure. Conversely, one may ask whether this picture bears on Lie semigroup and semigroupoid theory itself: whether linear Lie semigroups and semigroupoids admit relatively canonical atlases of this type, with charts and transition data determined by generator and seed data rather than ad hoc choices, in a way that extends constructs like the global polar-decomposition charts available for Ol’shanskii semigroups to more general wedges and algebraic structures [30]. Most generally, one need not restrict the local models to Krylov-Lie groups; any suitable family of compatible Lie group charts (e.g. automorphism groups of Jordan algebras) would fit into this picture, and the global measure-theoretic and dynamical questions reduce to gluing local Haar-based descriptions across overlaps. These gluing and chart-choice issues at face appear manageable in the compact, finite-dimensional regimes considered here, espe-cially when Krylov-Lie groups provide natural charts tied to the generator set and seed, but we do not develop a general theory of Lietic spaces or Lietic integration in this thesis. The term is primarily introduced for posterity and as a concise way to describe the geometric role played by local Lie-group charts in the Krylov–Lie approximation program. Theorem 4.2.1 controls the uniform Hilbert–Schmidt error between the original circuit map and its Krylov–Lie surrogate on compact subsets of the full-rank locus, and shows how this error propagates to expectations of bounded Lipschitz observables on U (d). In many variational settings, however, one is interested in observables that depend only on the action 55 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

of the circuit on a fixed initial state or on a chosen block seed. In that case, it is natural to refine the approximation theory to a seed-based setting, where the error is measured directly on the orbit of the seed and the observable is Lipschitz with respect to the Hilbert-space norm. The following proposition records this refinement in a form aligned with the notation of Theorem 4.2.1. 

Proposition 4.2.5 (Seed-based Krylov–Lie observable approximation) . Let M be the reach-able manifold of a fixed variational ansatz architecture, realized as a smooth subset of U (d),and let μM = q d vol M be the parameter sampling measure on M , with q ∈ C1(M ) and q ≥ 0.Fix a normalized initial state ψ ∈ H , which we assume to be an element of our block seed 

Ψ ∈ Σs (Remark 3.2.2 ), and let 

U : M → U (d), ι(k)Ψ ◦ κ(k)Ψ : M → U (d)

denote the original circuit map and the represented depth-k Krylov–Lie surrogate associated to the block seed Ψ as in Theorem 4.2.1. For a compact subset C ⊂ M contained in the full-rank locus Mfull (Ψ) , define the seed-based uniform error 

E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) := sup 

> x∈C

U(x)ψ − ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x)ψ .

Now let Φ : H → R be a bounded Lipschitz observable with respect to the Hilbert-space norm on H, with Lipschitz constant Lip ψ(Φ) , i.e. 

Φ( v) − Φ( w) ≤ Lip ψ(Φ) ∥v − w∥ for all v, w ∈ H .

Define the induced circuit observable 

Fψ : U (d) → R, Fψ(U ) := Φ  U ψ .

Then, for every compact subset C ⊂ Mfull (Ψ) , one has 

Z

> C

Fψ(U(x)) dμ M (x) −

Z

> K(k)Ψ

Fψ(ι(k)Ψ (g)) dν (k)Ψ,C (g) ≤ Lip ψ(Φ) μM (C) E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) , (4.1) 

where ν(k)Ψ,C (E) = R 

> E

ρ(k)Ψ,C dμ K(k)Ψ

is the pushforward measure of Theorem 4.2.1, represented as a Radon-Nikodym derivative integrated against the Haar measure over the KLG. 

56 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Proof. For each x ∈ C, by definition of Fψ and Φ, 

Fψ(U(x)) − Fψ(ι(k)Ψ (κ(k)Ψ (x))) ≤ Lip ψ(Φ) U(x)ψ − ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x)ψ ≤ Lip ψ(Φ) E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) .

Repeating the steps of the proof of (7) from Theorem 4.2.1 with this bound then yields the desired inequality of eq. (4.1). 

Remark 4.2.6 (Seed-based versus Hilbert–Schmidt error) . In Theorem 4.2.1 the uniform approximation error appears in the Hilbert–Schmidt norm on U (d), e.g. 

EC (k; Ψ) = sup 

> x∈C

U(x) − ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x)

> HS

.

By norm compatibility in finite dimensions one has 

U(x)ψ − ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x)ψ ≤ U(x) − ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x) 

> op

≤ U(x) − ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x)

> HS

for each x ∈ C and unit seed ψ. Hence 

E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) ≤ E C (k; Ψ) ,

so the seed-based bound in Proposition 4.2.5 is always controlled by the Hilbert–Schmidt error appearing in item (7) of Theorem 4.2.1. Additionally, observables of the form Fψ(U ) = Φ( U ψ ) are particularly natural in varia-tional quantum algorithms, where one typically fixes an initial state ψ and studies expecta-tion values or cost functions built from the parameterized circuit U(x) acting on that state. In such settings, the seed-based error E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) directly measures the approximation quality on the physically relevant orbit of ψ, and the corresponding observable bound (4.1) exploits the intrinsic Krylov subspace structure of the ansatz. 

4.2.1 Krylov–Lie Error Bounds from Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff 

In this subsection we record a seed-based factorial tail estimate for the canonical Krylov–Lie comparison map on a compact subset of the reachable manifold. The argument proceeds by choosing a finite family of ambient BCH charts on the compact set, bounding the homoge-neous BCH components by explicit norm estimates, and propagating these bounds to the seed-based remainder. Throughout, we fix ∥ · ∥ to be the operator norm on u(d) induced by the Hilbert space norm on H.57 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Lemma 4.2.7 (Local BCH charts with bounded exponents) . Let M ⊂ U (d) be the reachable manifold of the ansatz, and let C ⊂ M be compact. Then there exist open sets {Uα}Nα=1 with 

N finite and C ⊂ SNα=1 Uα as well as maps 

Ω(α) : Uα → u(d)

such that: 1. For each α and each x ∈ Uα,

U(x) = exp  Ω(α)(x).

2. Each Ω(α)(x) lies in a fixed ball 

Ω(α)(x) ≤ Rα for all x ∈ Uα ∩ C, 

with 0 < R α < R 0, where R0 > 0 is a BCH convergence radius for u(d) in the norm 

∥ · ∥ .3. On Uα ∩ C, the map Ω(α) is continuous and admits a graded BCH expansion 

Ω(α)(x) = X

> r≥1

Ω(α) 

> r

(x),

where each Ω(α) 

> r

(x) is a finite real-linear combination of nested commutators in the Her-mitian generators Hj of commutator depth r (again using, for instance, the transported bracket; see Remark 3.2.11), and the series converges absolutely in operator norm. Proof. Since M ⊂ U (d) is a finite-dimensional submanifold of the unitary group, and C ⊂ M

is compact, we may cover C by finitely many open sets Uα ⊂ M on which there exists a continuous branch of the matrix logarithm, Ω(α) : Uα → u(d), U(x) = exp  Ω(α)(x).

Because C is compact and Ω (α) is continuous, each ∥Ω(α)(x)∥ attains a maximum on Uα ∩ C,which we denote Rα. By shrinking Uα if necessary, we may assume Rα < R 0, where R0 > 0is any radius of convergence for the BCH series in u(d) with respect to ∥ · ∥ ; existence of such an R0 is standard for matrix Lie algebras [15]. The BCH expansion for Ω (α)(x) in terms of nested commutators of Hj is then valid for all x ∈ Uα ∩ C, and converges absolutely in operator norm because ∥Ω(α)(x)∥ < R 0.58 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

We now record norm estimates for the homogeneous BCH components on each chart. 

Lemma 4.2.8 (Homogeneous BCH component bounds) . In the setting of Lemma 4.2.7, fix 

α and consider Ω(α)(x) with ∥Ω(α)(x)∥ ≤ Rα < R 0. Write 

Ω(α)(x) = X

> r≥1

Ω(α) 

> r

(x),

with Ω(α) 

> r

(x) homogeneous of total degree r in the generators Hj . Then there exist constants 

K⋆ > 0 and γ > 0, depending only on u(d) and the norm ∥ · ∥ , such that 

Ω(α) 

> r

(x) ≤ K⋆

(γR α)r

r! for all r ≥ 1 and x ∈ Uα ∩ C. (4.2) 

Proof. We work in the finite-dimensional matrix Lie algebra u(d) ⊂ Md(C) endowed with the fixed operator norm ∥ · ∥ . For the purposes of this lemma, it suffices to regard the BCH map as an analytic function on a neighborhood of the origin and apply standard bounds on the coefficients of its power series. Consider the BCH map BCH : u(d) × u(d) → u(d), (X, Y ) 7 −→ log  exp X exp Y .

It is a classical fact that BCH is analytic on a neighborhood of (0 , 0) in u(d) × u(d) and admits a convergent power series expansion BCH( X, Y ) = X

> r≥1

Zr(X, Y ),

where each Zr is a homogeneous Lie polynomial of total degree r in X and Y with rational coefficients; see, for example, Dynkin’s calculation of BCH coefficients [15] and Hall’s expo-sition for matrix groups [24, Ch. 5]. In particular, there exists R0 > 0 such that the series converges in operator norm whenever ∥X∥, ∥Y ∥ < R 0.Fix any 0 < R < R 0, and consider the polydisc 

DR := (X, Y ) ∈ u(d) × u(d) ∥X∥ ≤ R, ∥Y ∥ ≤ R .

Because BCH is analytic and u(d) is finite dimensional, Cauchy-type estimates for analytic maps on Banach spaces imply that there exist constants K⋆ > 0 and γ > 0, depending only 59 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

on u(d) and ∥ · ∥ , such that for all r ≥ 1 and all ( X, Y ) ∈ D R,

Zr(X, Y ) ≤ K⋆

(γR )r

r! . (4.3) Intuitively, K⋆ and γ arise from bounding the supremum of ∥BCH( X, Y )∥ on DR and ap-plying Cauchy estimates to the Taylor coefficients of BCH viewed as a holomorphic map on u(d) × u(d); we refer to Dynkin and Hall for detailed derivations of such bounds [15][24, Ch. 5]. The homogeneous components Ω (α) 

> r

(x) appearing in the expansion of Ω (α)(x) are spe-cializations of the general homogeneous BCH polynomials Zr in two variables to the specific parametric family of generators Hj used to define the circuit and the local logarithm Ω (α)(x). In particular, for each x ∈ Uα ∩ C with ∥Ω(α)(x)∥ ≤ Rα < R 0, one can realize Ω (α)(x) as the value of BCH( X, Y ) for some pair ( X, Y ) with ∥X∥, ∥Y ∥ ≤ Rα obtained from the underlying Hermitian generators. Since Rα < R 0, we may choose R := Rα in (4.3). Specializing (4.3) to ( X, Y ) associated with Ω (α)(x) then yields 

Ω(α) 

> r

(x) ≤ K⋆

(γR α)r

r! for all r ≥ 1 and x ∈ Uα ∩ C, 

as claimed. 

Remark 4.2.9 (On the size of K⋆ and low-order errors) . The two constants K⋆ and γ in Lemma 4.2.8 are dimension- and norm-dependent quantities arising from the analytic Taylor coefficients of the BCH map. Because BCH expansions have a fundamentally combinatorial structure—each homogeneous term is a finite linear combination of iterated commutators with rational coefficients and a number of Lie words that grows like a Catalan-type sequence in the degree [15][24, Ch. 5]—it is natural to expect that K⋆ may be fairly large. In particular, 

K⋆ implicitly encodes the cumulative effect of this combinatorics together with the choice of operator norm. For the purposes of the present work, we do not attempt to optimize K⋆ or γ. The key qualitative feature of (4.2) is the factorial decay in r with respect to the radius Rα: all dependence on the BCH degree r is carried by ( γR α)r/r !, while K⋆ and γ remain fixed once the algebra and the norm are specified. In applications to Krylov-Lie error bounds, this factorial structure is what drives the super-exponential decay of the BCH tail in the depth parameter k, and it dominates any fixed exponential factor in K⋆ and γR α asymptotically. We emphasize, however, that the specific values of K⋆ and γ can matter for low-order error bounds and concrete numerical estimates. A sharper analysis of BCH coefficients tailored to a particular generator set or norm could, in principle, reduce these constants and improve 60 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

finite-k bounds. Such optimizations lie beyond the scope of this thesis; our use of K⋆ and γ

is intended to exhibit a uniform factorial bound consistent with standard BCH theory rather than to capture the best possible constants. We now bring the seed and the Krylov–Lie structure into our analysis. Fix a block seed Ψ ∈ Σs (see Remark 3.2.2), and let ψ ∈ H be a normalized initial state which we assume to be one of the components of Ψ. Let 

κ(k)Ψ : M → K(k)Ψ , ι(k)Ψ : K(k)Ψ ,→ U (d)be the depth-k comparison map and represented embedding from Theorem 4.2.1. 

Definition 4.2.10 (Seed-level Krylov–Lie matching up to depth k). Let C ⊂ M be compact and let {Uα} and Ω (α) as well as Ω (α) 

> r

be as in Lemma 4.2.7. We say that the depth-k Krylov– Lie algebra l(k)Ψ (Definition 3.2.9) reproduces all BCH commutator directions up to depth k

on the seed over C if, for each chart Uα and each x ∈ Uα ∩ C, one has Ω(α) 

> r

(x)ψ = Ω (α) 

> k,r

(x)ψ for all 1 ≤ r ≤ k, 

where Ω (α) 

> k,r

(x) ∈ l(k)Ψ is the homogeneous depth-r BCH term in the exponent of κ(k)Ψ (x)(Proposition 4.1.2) on K(k)Ψ (Definition 3.2.12). Under this matching, the seed-level difference in exponents is purely a tail of higher-depth commutators. 

Lemma 4.2.11 (Seed-level BCH remainder) . In the setting of Definition 4.2.10, define the ambient BCH remainder on Uα by 

R(α) 

> k

(x) := Ω (α)(x) − eΩ(α) 

> k

(x),

where eΩ(α) 

> k

(x) ∈ u(d) is the ambient exponent of ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x) with block form 

eΩ(α) 

> k

(x) = Ω(α) 

> k

(x) 00 0

!

,

and Ω(α) 

> k

(x) ∈ l(k)Ψ is the BCH exponent of κ(k)Ψ (x) on K(k)Ψ . Then for each x ∈ Uα ∩ C,

R(α) 

> k

(x)ψ = X

> r>k

 Ω(α) 

> r

(x)ψ − eΩ(α) 

> k,r

(x)ψ,

where eΩ(α) 

> k,r

(x) denotes the ambient embedding of Ω(α) 

> k,r

(x).

61 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Proof. Writing Ω(α)(x) = X

> r≥1

Ω(α) 

> r

(x), eΩ(α) 

> k

(x) = X

> r≥1

eΩ(α) 

> k,r

(x),

one has 

R(α) 

> k

(x) = X

> r≥1

 Ω(α) 

> r

(x) − eΩ(α) 

> k,r

(x).

Acting on ψ and using the matching Ω (α) 

> r

(x)ψ = Ω (α) 

> k,r

(x)ψ for 1 ≤ r ≤ k yields 

R(α) 

> k

(x)ψ = X

> r>k

 Ω(α) 

> r

(x)ψ − eΩ(α) 

> k,r

(x)ψ.

Fortuitously, the standard Krylov-Lie model with the canonical comparison map has the property of Definition 4.2.10, and so Lemma 4.2.11 is material. 

Proposition 4.2.12 (Canonical comparison map preserves BCH directions up to depth k).

In the setting of Lemma 4.2.7 and Theorem 4.2.1, fix a block seed Ψ ∈ Σs (Definition 3.2.1) and a commutator depth k ≥ 1, and let 

κ(k)Ψ : M → K(k)Ψ , ι(k)Ψ : K(k)Ψ ,→ U (d)

be the canonical depth-k comparison map and represented embedding constructed from the Hermitian generators Hj by projection to the Krylov–Lie subspace K(k)Ψ (Definition 3.2.8) as in Proposition 4.1.2. Let ψ ∈ H be a normalized initial state belonging to the block seed Ψ.For each chart Uα and each x ∈ Uα ∩ C, write 

Ω(α)(x) = X

> r≥1

Ω(α) 

> r

(x), Ω(α) 

> k

(x) = X

> r≥1

Ω(α) 

> k,r

(x)

for the homogeneous BCH expansions of the ambient logarithm Ω(α)(x) of U(x) and the logarithm Ω(α) 

> k

(x) of κ(k)Ψ (x) on K(k)Ψ . Then, for all 1 ≤ r ≤ k and all x ∈ Uα ∩ C, one has 

Ω(α) 

> r

(x)ψ = Ω (α) 

> k,r

(x)ψ. (4.4) 

That is to say, the canonical Krylov–Lie comparison map satisfies Definition 4.2.10 up to depth k on the seed over C.Proof. Fix a chart Uα and x ∈ Uα ∩ C. On Uα, by assumption the original circuit map 

U is described by a product of exponentials of the Hermitian generators with real-analytic 62 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

parameter functions, 

U(x) = exp  iθ p(x)Hip

 · · · exp  iθ 1(x)Hi1

,

for some real-analytic functions θj : Uα → R, as in Proposition 4.1.2 (recall that p may be greater than the number of generators, n). The ambient logarithm Ω (α)(x) is then obtained by applying the BCH formula iteratively to this product, and it can be written as a convergent Lie series Ω(α)(x) = X

> r≥1

Ω(α) 

> r

(x),

where each Ω (α) 

> r

(x) is a homogeneous Lie polynomial of total degree r in the generators Hj

and their nested commutators, with rational coefficients [15][24, Ch. 5]. In particular, for each r ≥ 1, Ω(α) 

> r

(x) = X

> w∈W r

cw(x) w(H1, . . . , H n),

where Wr is a finite index set of Lie words of total degree r in the generators, each word 

w(H1, . . . , H n) is a nested commutator of depth r (Definition 3.2.3 and Remark 3.2.4), and 

cw(x) are rational coefficients depending real-analytically on x.By construction of the canonical comparison map, the compressed generators on the Krylov–Lie subspace K(k)Ψ are given by 

eHj := PΨHj PΨ ∈ End  K(k)Ψ

,

where PΨ is the orthogonal projector onto K(k)Ψ . The depth-k comparison map κ(k)Ψ (x) is defined by replacing each occurrence of Hj in the circuit word by its compressed version eHj

and taking the product of exponentials in End  K(k)Ψ

,

κ(k)Ψ (x) = exp  iθ p(x) eHip

 · · · exp  iθ 1(x) eHi1

.

Applying BCH to this product in End  K(k)Ψ

 yields Ω(α) 

> k

(x) = X

> r≥1

Ω(α) 

> k,r

(x),

where each Ω (α) 

> k,r

(x) is obtained from Ω (α) 

> r

(x) by replacing every occurrence of Hj with eHj

63 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

and restricting to K(k)Ψ . In particular, Ω(α) 

> k,r

(x) = X

> w∈W r

cw(x) w( eH1, . . . , eHn),

with the same index set Wr and coefficients cw(x) as in the ambient expansion. Now fix ψ ∈ Ψ. By definition of the depth-k Krylov subspace (Definition 3.2.5), for any Lie word w(H1, . . . , H n) of total degree r ≤ k one has 

w(H1, . . . , H n) ψ ∈ K (k)Ψ ,

because K(k)Ψ is generated by applying nested commutators of depth up to k in the Hj to the seed block. On K(k)Ψ , the projector PΨ acts as the identity, and the compressed generators satisfy eHj K(k)Ψ

= Hj K(k)Ψ

, by Definition 3.2.6. It follows that for each Lie word w of total degree r ≤ k,

w( eH1, . . . , eHn) ψ = PΨ w(H1, . . . , H n) PΨ ψ = w(H1, . . . , H n) ψ. 

Therefore, for each 1 ≤ r ≤ k,Ω(α) 

> k,r

(x)ψ = X

> w∈W r

cw(x) w( eH1, . . . , eHn) ψ

= X

> w∈W r

cw(x) w(H1, . . . , H n) ψ

= Ω (α) 

> r

(x)ψ. 

This proves (4.4) for all 1 ≤ r ≤ k and all x ∈ Uα ∩ C.Since the argument is independent of α and x, the conclusion holds on every chart meeting 

C, and hence the canonical Krylov–Lie comparison map satisfies the seed-level matching condition of Definition 4.2.10 up to depth k on the seed over C.

Remark 4.2.13 . For the canonical Krylov–Lie comparison map used throughout this thesis, Proposition 4.2.12 implies that the matching condition of Definition 4.2.10 is a built-in feature of the construction: the compressed exponent Ω (α) 

> k

(x) is obtained by projecting the ambient BCH series to the Krylov–Lie subspace K(k)Ψ and replacing each generator Hj by its compressed version eHj . As a result, all commutator directions up to depth k act identically on the seed ψ ∈ Ψ, and the seed-level difference in exponents is purely a tail of higher-depth BCH terms. We state Definition 4.2.10 abstractly in order to isolate the structural property required for the factorial BCH tail bounds and to accommodate potential future comparison 64 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

maps whose low-order matching behavior may differ from the canonical projection. We may now bound the seed-based remainder on each chart using the BCH component estimates. 

Lemma 4.2.14 (Factorial seed-based BCH remainder on a chart) . In the setting of the Lemmas 4.2.7–4.2.11, for each chart Uα and each x ∈ Uα ∩ C one has 

R(α) 

> k

(x)ψ ≤ X

> r>k

Ω(α) 

> r

(x)ψ + X

> r>k

eΩ(α) 

> k,r

(x)ψ .

Moreover, there exist explicit constants K(ψ) 

> α

> 0 and Bα > 0 such that for all x ∈ Uα ∩ C

and all k sufficiently large (by enlarging K(ψ) 

> α

if necessary, one may ensure that this bound holds for all k above any prescribed depth), 

R(α) 

> k

(x)ψ ≤ K(ψ)

> α

Bk+1 

> α

(k + 1)! , (4.5) 

with 

K(ψ) 

> α

= K⋆cα + eK⋆ecα, Bα = max {γR α, ˜γ eRα},

where K⋆ is as in Lemma 4.2.8, cα and ecα are scalar tail constants depending on Rα and 

eRα, and eK⋆, eRα are compression-dependent analogues of K⋆, R α for the exponent of κ(k)Ψ

(Proposition 4.1.2) on K(k)Ψ (Definition 3.2.12). Proof. The inequality with the two tails is immediate from Lemma 4.2.11. For the first tail, using ∥Ω(α) 

> r

(x)ψ∥ ≤ ∥ Ω(α) 

> r

(x)∥ and Lemma 4.2.8 gives 

X

> r>k

Ω(α) 

> r

(x)ψ ≤ K⋆

X

> r>k

(γR α)r

r! .

For each fixed Rα > 0, the scalar tail 

X

> r>k

(γR α)r

r!is the remainder of the Taylor series for eγR α at order k, and hence satisfies 

X

> r>k

(γR α)r

r! = (γR α)k+1 

(k + 1)! 

> ∞

X

> m=0

(γR α)m

Qm+1  

> j=2

(k + j).

For each fixed Rα, the inner series tends to 1 as k → ∞ , so there exists a threshold k0(γR α)65 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

such that X

> r>k

(γR α)r

r! ≤ cα

(γR α)k+1 

(k + 1)! for all k ≥ k0(γR α),

where cα ≥ 1 depends only on γR α (for instance, one may take cα = 2 once k is beyond a fixed threshold; by adjusting cα, we may perform this step no matter what our initial grade is). Thus, for all k sufficiently large we obtain 

X

> r>k

Ω(α) 

> r

(x)ψ ≤ K⋆cα

(γR α)k+1 

(k + 1)! .

For the compressed tail, the exponent Ω (α) 

> k

(x) on K(k)Ψ is a matrix Lie algebra element whose homogeneous components in the compressed generators satisfy the same type of esti-mate as in Lemma 4.2.8, but with radii eRα and constant eK⋆ depending on the compression and the depth-k KLA. Thus 

X

> r>k

eΩ(α) 

> k,r

(x)ψ ≤ eK⋆

X

> r>k

(˜ γ eRα)r

r! ≤ eK⋆ecα

(˜ γ eRα)k+1 

(k + 1)! for all k sufficiently large. Combining the two tail bounds and setting 

K(ψ) 

> α

:= K⋆cα + eK⋆ecα, Bα := max {γR α, ˜γ eRα},

yields (4.5). We can now pass from charts to the compact subset C and obtain the desired global seed-based factorial bound. 

Theorem 4.2.15 (Global seed-based factorial BCH/Krylov–Lie error bound) . Let C ⊂ M

be a compact subset. Assume that Lemma 4.2.7 and Definition 4.2.10 hold on C. Define the seed-based uniform approximation error 

E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) := sup 

> x∈C

U(x)ψ − ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x)ψ .

Then there exist explicit constants A(ψ) 

> C

> 0 and BC > 0 depending only on C, the generators, and the architecture such that for all k sufficiently large, 

E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) ≤ A(ψ)

> C

Bk+1 

> C

(k + 1)! , (4.6) 66 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

where one may take 

BC := max  

> α

Bα, A(ψ) 

> C

:= max  

> α

K(ψ) 

> α

.

Proof. For each x ∈ C choose α with x ∈ Uα. By Lemma 4.2.14, 

U(x)ψ − ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x)ψ ≤ R(α) 

> k

(x)ψ ≤ K(ψ)

> α

Bk+1 

> α

(k + 1)! for all k sufficiently large. Taking the supremum over x ∈ C and over a finite number of charts α covering C (C is compact) yields 

E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) ≤ max  

> α

K(ψ)

> α

 max α Bα

k+1 

(k + 1)! ,

which is (4.6) with the stated choices of A(ψ) 

> C

and BC .

Remark 4.2.16 . In the setting of the canonical Krylov–Lie comparison map κ(k)Ψ associated with the depth-k Krylov–Lie algebra generated by the circuit generators and the seed block, the constants A(ψ) 

> C

and BC in Theorem 4.2.15 arise from the BCH convergence radii on charts covering C together with the compressed BCH radii for the exponent of κ(k)Ψ on K(k)Ψ and the corresponding analytic BCH constants (e.g. γ or ˜ γ). For a fixed circuit architecture and generator set, these constants depend only on the ambient chart geometry and on the choice of seed, and the theorem applies directly to the canonical comparison map by the seed-level BCH matching property established in Proposition 4.2.12. The depth dependence of the approximation is entirely captured by the factorial tail ( Bk+1  

> C

/(k + 1)!), whose decay in k

dominates any purely exponential decay in the seed-based metric. 

4.2.2 Commutator Budget and Krylov–Lie Approximation Quality 

We now formalize the intuitive picture that higher-order BCH commutator directions live in a quotient of the depth-k Krylov–Lie algebra by the span of the compressed Hermitian gen-erators, with a dimension budget that constrains how much genuinely new geometry remains beyond first order. This quotient, together with the factorial seed-based BCH/Krylov–Lie error bound, controls the quality of approximation on the reachable manifold. 

Lemma 4.2.17 (Higher-commutator BCH sector modulo the generator span) . Let M ⊂

U (d) be a reachable manifold of dimension m, and let S = {H1, . . . , H n} be a fixed Hermitian generator set for a variational ansatz in the sense of Remark 3.2.11. Fix a normalized block seed Ψ ∈ Σs (Remark 3.2.2), and let 

Kk := K(k)Ψ (S) ⊂ H 

67 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

denote the depth-k Krylov–Lie subspace generated by S and Ψ, as in Definition 3.2.8. Let 

lk := l(k)Ψ (S) ⊂ End( Kk)

be the corresponding depth-k Krylov–Lie algebra, as in Definition 3.2.8. Assume we are in the dimension-matched regime 

dim lk = m. 

On a neighborhood of a compact subset C ⊂ M , suppose that the canonical depth-k

Krylov–Lie comparison map 

κ(k)Ψ : C → U (Kk)

admits a BCH exponent 

κ(k)Ψ (x) = exp  Ω(α) 

> k

(x), Ω(α) 

> k

(x) = X

> r≥1

Ω(α) 

> k,r

(x),

on each chart Uα meeting C, where each homogeneous component Ω(α) 

> k,r

(x) ∈ lk has commu-tator depth r in the compressed Hermitian generators 

eH(k) 

> j

:= P (k)Ψ Hj P (k)Ψ Kk

, j = 1 , . . . , n, 

with P (k)Ψ the orthogonal projector onto Kk.Define the real generator subspace 

Gk := span R{ eH(k)1 , . . . , eH(k) 

> n

} ⊂ lk, nk := dim Gk,

and let 

πk : lk → lk/G k

be the quotient map. Define the higher-commutator BCH sector over C by 

Ck(C) := span R

n

πk

 Ω(α) 

> k,r

(x) x ∈ C, r ≥ 2, U α ∋ x

o

⊂ lk/G k.

Then: 1. The degree-one BCH term lies in the generator subspace: 

Ω(α) 

> k, 1

(x) ∈ Gk for all x ∈ C and all charts Uα ∋ x, 

and therefore πk

 Ω(α) 

> k, 1

(x) = 0 .

68 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

2. All genuinely new BCH directions beyond the generators are encoded by Ck(C), in the sense that any class πk

 Ω(α) 

> k,r

(x)̸ = 0 with r ≥ 2 represents a genuinely new commutator direction modulo Gk.3. One has the dimension bound 

dim Ck(C) ≤ dim  lk/G k

 = m − nk. (4.7) 

In particular, the total number of independent directions that higher-order BCH com-mutators of the canonical comparison map can contribute modulo the generator span is at most m − nk.Proof. By construction of the canonical comparison map on each chart Uα, one has 

κ(k)Ψ (x) = exp  iθ α,p (x) eH(k)

> ip

 · · · exp  iθ α, 1(x) eH(k)

> i1

,

for suitable real-analytic functions θα,j , so the degree-one BCH term is the linear combination Ω(α) 

> k, 1

(x) = 

> p

X

> j=1

iθ α,j (x) eH(k) 

> ij

∈ Gk.

Hence πk

 Ω(α) 

> k, 1

(x) = 0 for all x ∈ C and all charts Uα ∋ x, proving (1). Every BCH term Ω (α) 

> k,r

(x) lies in lk, so passing to the quotient lk/G k removes precisely the directions already visible at first order, namely the generator span 

Gk = span R

 eH(k) 

> j

j = 1 , . . . , n .

Thus any nonzero class πk

 Ω(α) 

> k,r

(x) with r ≥ 2 represents a genuinely new commutator direction modulo Gk, and the span of all such classes over x ∈ C, r ≥ 2, and charts Uα

meeting C is exactly Ck(C). This proves (2). Finally, Ck(C) is a real subspace of lk/G k, so dim Ck(C) ≤ dim  lk/G k

 = dim lk − dim Gk = m − nk,

which is (4.7). 

Proposition 4.2.18 (Layered generator growth consumes commutator budget) . In the set-ting of Lemma 4.2.17, consider a family of ansatz architectures indexed by an external layer parameter L, each with generator set SL = {HL, 1, . . . , H L,n L }, reachable manifold ML ⊂ U (d)69 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

of dimension mL, depth-k Krylov–Lie subspace 

K(L) 

> k

:= K(k)Ψ (SL) ⊂ H ,

and depth-k Krylov–Lie algebra 

l(L) 

> k

:= l(k)Ψ (SL) ⊂ End  K(L)

> k



in the dimension-matched regime 

dim l(L) 

> k

= mL.

Let 

G(L) 

> k

:= span R{ eH(k)

> L, 1

, . . . , eH(k) 

> L,n L

} ⊂ l(L) 

> k

, n(L) 

> k

:= dim G(L) 

> k

,

denote the generator subspace, where eH(k) 

> L,j

:= P (L) 

> k

HL,j P (L) 

> kK(L)
> k

are the compressed Hermitian generators on K(L) 

> k

and P (L) 

> k

is the corresponding orthogonal projector. For any compact subset C ⊂ ML one has 

dim C(L) 

> k

(C) ≤ mL − n(L) 

> k

,

where C(L) 

> k

(C) is defined as in Lemma 4.2.17 for the architecture SL.If passing from layer L to layer L+1 introduces δL ≥ 1 new linearly independent generator directions at depth k, so that 

n(L+1)  

> k

≥ n(L) 

> k

+ δL,

while the reachable manifold dimension mL remains fixed along this family, then the available BCH commutator budget is reduced by at least δL:

mL − n(L+1)  

> k

≤ mL − n(L) 

> k

− δL.

In particular, if n(L) 

> k

becomes close to mL for some architecture L, then 

mL − n(L) 

> k

≪ mL,

and the higher-commutator sector C(L) 

> k

(C) has very limited dimension. Proof. Applying Lemma 4.2.17 to each architecture L gives dim C(L) 

> k

(C) ≤ mL − n(L) 

> k

.

70 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

If n(L+1)  

> k

≥ n(L) 

> k

+ δL and mL+1 = mL, then 

mL − n(L+1)  

> k

≤ mL − n(L) 

> k

− δL.

The final claim is just a restatement of the fact that dim C(L) 

> k

(C) ≤ mL − n(L) 

> k

.

Remark 4.2.19 (Quotient budget and approximation quality) . In the regimes where the dimension-matched depth-k Krylov–Lie algebra l(L) 

> k

has generator span G(L) 

> k

well below full dimension, the quotient budget mL − n(L) 

> k

is large and there is room for higher-order BCH commutators of the canonical comparison map κ(k)Ψ to contribute genuinely new directions beyond the compressed generators. In such cases, increasing k can improve the Krylov–Lie approximation by filling more of the quotient l(L) 

> k

/G (L) 

> k

.By contrast, when n(L) 

> k

approaches mL, the quotient dimension mL − n(L) 

> k

shrinks and may become very small. From the point of view of Krylov–Lie approximation, this is disad-vantageous: the available commutator budget is then largely consumed by keeping up with the growing generator span, leaving little room for spending depth on genuinely new com-mutator directions. In such architectures, improving approximation quality by increasing 

k is constrained by the fact that higher-commutator directions cannot occupy more than 

mL − n(L) 

> k

dimensions. When this quotient budget is small and commutator growth is tame, the seed-based factorial BCH/Krylov–Lie error bound 

E(Ψ)  

> C

(k) ≤ A(Ψ) 

> C

Bk+1 

> C

(k + 1)! for the canonical comparison map κ(k)Ψ shows that the remaining depth can be used to make the approximators geometrically faithful at finite k, with the quality of approximation governed jointly by the norm scale BC of the BCH exponent and the dimensional budget 

mL − n(L) 

> k

available to higher commutators. 

## 4.3 Concentration of Measure for Krylov–Lie Approximators 

We close this chapter by recording two concentration of measure statements: a general geometric concentration result on compact represented Krylov–Lie groups, and a simple transport principle showing that, for seed-based observables, concentration properties of the Krylov–Lie proxy transfer to the original circuit up to the factorially small approximation error from Theorem 4.2.15. 71 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Theorem 4.3.1 (Geometric concentration on compact Krylov–Lie groups) . Let K be a compact connected represented Krylov–Lie group equipped with a bi-invariant Riemannian metric and normalized Haar measure μK . Then μK satisfies a logarithmic Sobolev inequality with some constant α > 0:

Ent μK (f 2) ≤ 2α

Z

> K

|∇ f |2 dμ K for all Lipschitz f : K → R,

where 

Ent μK (f 2) := 

Z

> K

f 2 log( f 2) dμ K −

Z

> K

f 2 dμ K



log 

Z

> K

f 2 dμ K



denotes the entropy of f 2 with respect to μK . In particular, if F : K → R is λ-Lipschitz with respect to the Riemannian distance on K, then for every ε > 0,

μK



F −

Z

> K

F dμ K ≥ ε



≤ 2 exp 



− ε2

2αλ 2



. (4.8) 

Proof. Since K is a compact connected Lie group, its bi-invariant Riemannian metric has nonnegative Ricci curvature bounded below, and the associated heat kernel satisfies a loga-rithmic Sobolev inequality with some finite constant α > 0; see, for example, Naor for the general Riemannian theory [33]. The Herbst argument applied to the logarithmic Sobolev inequality yields the sub-Gaussian concentration estimate (4.8) for every Lipschitz F , as claimed. 

Remark 4.3.2 . The theorem above should be viewed as a geometric baseline: once the reach-able manifold is faithfully approximated by a compact dimension-matched or dimension-reduced Krylov–Lie group K on a compact seed orbit, Lipschitz losses on K already con-centrate under the Haar measure at a scale governed by the intrinsic geometry of K. The genuinely finite-depth, non-Haar structure of a variational ansatz then shows up as a de-viation from this geometric baseline, rather than as a complete absence of concentration phenomena, as we shall now show. 

Proposition 4.3.3 (Concentration for the pushforward measure on K). Let K be a compact represented Krylov–Lie group equipped with a bi-invariant Riemannian metric and normal-ized Haar measure μK . Let ν be a probability measure on K absolutely continuous with respect to μK , with density q = dν/dμ K . Assume ∥q∥∞ := ess sup g∈K q(g) < ∞.Let F : K → R be λ-Lipschitz with respect to the Riemannian distance on K, and let 

mK := 

Z

> K

F dμ K , mν := 

Z

> K

F dν. 

72 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Set 

∆ := |mν − mK |.

Then, for every ε > 0,

ν {| F − mν | ≥ ε} ≤ min 



1, 2∥q∥∞ exp 



−(ε − ∆) 2+

2αλ 2



, (4.9) 

where α > 0 is the logarithmic Sobolev constant from Theorem 4.3.1 and (x)+ := max {x, 0}.In particular, if ∆ < ε , then 

ν {| F − mν | ≥ ε} ≤ 2∥q∥∞ exp 



−(ε − ∆) 2

2αλ 2



.

Proof. Fix ε > 0 and write ∆ := |mν − mK |. By the triangle inequality, 

|F − mν | ≤ | F − mK | + ∆ .

Hence, if ε > ∆ and |F − mν | ≥ ε, then necessarily 

|F − mK | ≥ ε − ∆.

Therefore, because the above implies that 

{| F − mν | ≥ ε} ⊂ {| F − mK | ≥ ε − ∆}

we have the inequality 

ν {| F − mν | ≥ ε} ≤ ν {| F − mK | ≥ ε − ∆}.

Using absolute continuity and the density bound, 

ν {| F − mK | ≥ ε − ∆} ≤ ∥ q∥∞ μK

 {| F − mK | ≥ ε − ∆}.

By Theorem 4.3.1, 

μK

 {| F − mK | ≥ t} ≤ 2 exp 



− t2

2αλ 2



for all t > 0.

73 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Applying this with t = ε − ∆ yields 

ν {| F − mν | ≥ ε} ≤ 2∥q∥∞ exp 



−(ε − ∆) 2

2αλ 2



(ε > ∆) .

If ε ≤ ∆, we use the trivial bound 

ν {| F − mν | ≥ ε} ≤ 1.

Combining the two cases gives (4.9). 

Remark 4.3.4 . The trivial bound for the case ∆ ≥ ε is not a technical failure of the argument. It marks the regime in which the pushforward mean has drifted too far from the Haar mean for Haar concentration on K to determine concentration of ν about its own mean without added control on the density. We now show that, for observables depending on the seed orbit, concentration properties of the Krylov–Lie surrogate transfer directly to the original circuit up to the seed-based factorial error from Theorem 4.2.15. This is the concentration-of-measure analogue of the approximation theorem. 

Theorem 4.3.5 (Transport of concentration from Krylov–Lie proxy) . Let C ⊂ M be a compact subset of the reachable manifold, and fix a normalized block seed Ψ ∈ Σs ⊂ H (see Remark 3.2.2) together with a choice of initial state ψ ∈ Ψ. Let 

U : M → U (d), ι(k)Ψ ◦ κ(k)Ψ : M → U (d)

denote the original circuit and the ambient canonical depth-k Krylov–Lie comparison unitary associated to Ψ, as in Theorem 4.2.15. Define the seed-based uniform approximation error 

E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) := sup 

> x∈C

U(x)ψ − ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x)ψ .

Let μC := μM |C be a probability measure on C obtained by restricting a probability measure 

μM on M , and let ν denote the pushforward of μC under κ(k)Ψ , transported to K(k)Ψ via the rep-resented unitary action (so that observables composed with ι(k)Ψ ◦ κ(k)Ψ are naturally evaluated against ν). Let Φ : H → R be bounded and Lipschitz with constant Lip ψ(Φ) with respect to the Hilbert space norm on H, and define the seed-based circuit observables 

Fψ(U ) := Φ  U ψ .

74 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Then for every x ∈ C one has 

Fψ

 U(x) − Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x) ≤ Lip ψ(Φ) E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) . (4.10) 

Consequently, 

EμC

Fψ

 U(x) − Eν

Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g) ≤ Lip ψ(Φ) E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) , (4.11) 

Var μC

Fψ

 U(x) − Var ν

Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g) ≤ 4∥Φ∥∞ Lip ψ(Φ) E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) , (4.12) 

where 

∥Φ∥∞ := sup 

> v∈H

|Φ( v)|.

Moreover, if Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x) satisfies a concentration inequality with respect to ν,

ν  Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x) − Eν

Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g) ≥ ε  ≤ 2 exp 



− ε2

2σ2

> k



for all ε > 0

for some variance proxy σ2 

> k

> 0, then Fψ

 U(x) satisfies 

μC

  |Fψ

 U(x) − EμC

Fψ

 U(x) | ≥ ε + 2Lip ψ(Φ) E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ)  ≤ 2 exp 



− ε2

2σ2

> k



∀ ε > 0.

(4.13) 

In particular, using the seed-based factorial error bound 

E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) ≤ A(ψ)

> C

Bk+1 

> C

(k + 1)! 

from Theorem 4.2.15, then 

EμC

Fψ

 U(x) − Eν

Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g) ≤ Lip ψ(Φ) A(ψ)

> C

Bk+1 

> C

(k + 1)! , (4.14) 

Var μC

Fψ

 U(x) − Var ν

Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g) ≤ 4∥Φ∥∞ Lip ψ(Φ) A(ψ)

> C

Bk+1 

> C

(k + 1)! , (4.15) 

and the threshold shift in (4.13) is of order 

2Lip ψ(Φ) A(ψ)

> C

Bk+1 

> C

(k + 1)! .

Proof. The first inequality in the theorem is given directly by Proposition 4.2.5. For the 75 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

variance comparison, write Var μC

Fψ

 U(x) =

Z

> C



Fψ

 U(x) − EμC Fψ

 U(x)2

dμ C (x),

and Var ν

Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g) =

Z

> K(k)Ψ



Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g) − Eν Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g)2

dν (g).

Using the pushforward relation, the second variance can be written as Var ν

Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g) =

Z

> C



Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x) − Eν Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g)2

dμ C (x).

Using the identity a2 − b2 = ( a − b)( a + b) with 

a = Fψ

 U(x) − EμC Fψ

 U(x), b = Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x) − Eν Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g),

we obtain 



Fψ

 U(x) − EμC Fψ

 U(x)2

−



Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x) − Eν Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g)2

=



Fψ

 U(x)−Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x)  

Fψ

 U(x)+Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x) −EμC Fψ

 U(x)−Eν Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g)

.

Since |Φ| ≤ ∥ Φ∥∞ pointwise and both expectations are bounded in absolute value by ∥Φ∥∞,we have 

Fψ

 U(x) + Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x) − EμC Fψ

 U(x) − Eν Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g) ≤ 4∥Φ∥∞.

Combining this with (4.10) and integrating over C gives 

Var μC

Fψ

 U(x) − Var ν

Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g) 

≤ 4∥Φ∥∞

Z

> C

Fψ

 U(x) − Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x) dμ C (x)

≤ 4∥Φ∥∞ Lip ψ(Φ) E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) ,

which is the variance bound. 76 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

For the concentration transport, note that for all x ∈ C,

Fψ

 U(x) − EμC Fψ

 U(x)

≤ Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x) − Eν Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g) + Fψ

 U(x) − Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x) 

+ EμC Fψ

 U(x) − Eν Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g)

≤ Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x) − Eν Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g) + 2Lip ψ(Φ) E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) ,

using the pointwise and expectation bounds. Hence, if 

Fψ

 U(x) − EμC Fψ

 U(x) ≥ ε + 2Lip ψ(Φ) E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) ,

then necessarily 

Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x) − Eν Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g) ≥ ε. 

Therefore 

μC

n 

Fψ

 U(x) − EμC Fψ

 U(x) ≥ ε + 2Lip ψ(Φ) E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) 

o 

≤ ν

n 

Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ

 κ(k)Ψ (x) − Eν Fψ

 ι(k)Ψ (g) ≥ ε

o 

.

Under the hypothesis that the right-hand side is bounded by 2 exp  −ε2/(2 σ2

> k

) for all ε > 0, we obtain (4.13). Finally, substituting the seed-based factorial error bound 

E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) ≤ A(ψ)

> C

Bk+1 

> C

(k + 1)! from Theorem 4.2.15 into the expectation, variance, and threshold-shift estimates gives the explicit factorial bounds stated at the end of the theorem. 

Remark 4.3.6 . Theorem 4.3.5 shows that, for seed-dependent observables, the concentration behavior of the original circuit on a compact subset C ⊂ M is controlled by that of the Krylov–Lie proxy, with a threshold shift of order Bk+1  

> C

/(k + 1)!. In particular, if the proxy ensemble on K (for example under Haar on K or under a structured parameter distribution whose pushforward is supported on K) does not exhibit the cost-concentration behavior characteristic of barren plateaus, then neither does the original circuit, up to the factorially small correction given by the seed-based BCH/Krylov–Lie error bound. This provides a clean Lie-theoretic bridge between the geometric concentration properties of Krylov–Lie 77 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

groups and the observable concentration properties of variational quantum circuits on their reachable manifolds. Separately, from the depth-scaling point of view, the seed-based BCH/Krylov–Lie error bound 

E(ψ) 

> C

(k; Ψ) ≤ A(ψ)

> C

Bk+1 

> C

(k + 1)! implies that the original circuit converges to its Krylov–Lie approximator in depth k at a super-exponential rate governed by Bk+1  

> C

/(k+1)!. In contrast, design-based theories typically yield approximation rates that are at best exponential in depth [37]. Asymptotically in k,the Krylov–Lie framework hence provides a strictly stronger convergence guarantee to the surrogate ensemble than the exponential decay of errors available in design-based approaches. 78 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

## CHAPTER 5 APPLICATIONS TO VQA LANDSCAPE THEORY 

In this chapter we suppress the seed and commutator-depth labels, since the formulas are structural and hold for any fixed represented Krylov-Lie group. In applications, the group, representation, induced density, and other pertinent quantities will of course depend on those choices. 

## 5.1 Moment Formulas for Krylov-Lie Approximators 

5.1.1 Expectation Value of the Loss under a Weighted Sampling Measure 

We now derive the expectation value of the reduced loss function—that is, the component of the loss function directly seen by the Krylov-Lie algebra. The reduced loss is the function for which the Krylov-Lie theory expresses most of its interpretative power. In practice, it is natural (though not strictly necessary) to choose a block seed that includes the initial state on which the circuit acts, since in that case, by Theorem 4.3.5, the restriction to the associated Krylov-Lie subspace yields approximation errors that decay factorially in the Krylov grade, while any remaining components of the ambient loss live in directions orthogonal to this subspace. In addition, by analogy with the relationship between upgrading the DLA theory of Ragone et al. to Anschuetz’ JAWS framework [2, 37], it is reasonable to assume that a fully fledged Krylov–Jordan theory would produce algebraic moment formulas with significant qualitative similarities to those obtained here for the reduced loss function of the Krylov-Lie theory. For this reason, the reduced loss function provides the most informative first approximation to the VQA loss landscape, even when the ultimate object of interest is the ambient loss. One can certainly perform these calculations in an ambient setting, but they become much more unwieldy and difficult to interpret in a clean, algebraic fashion, which reinforces the need for a Jordan-centric theory [2]. This is amplified by the fact that the compression mechanism of Krylov algebras forces them to exist in a subspace of the ambient space in which our observables and density matrices tend to live. Let K be the compact Krylov-Lie group (Definition 3.2.12), let μK denote its normalized 79 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Haar probability measure, and let 

π : K −→ U (K)be the finite-dimensional unitary representation on the Krylov-Lie subspace K (Defini-tion 3.2.8). Define Ad g(X) := π(g)Xπ (g)†, ℓ(g) := Tr  O Ad g(ρ), (5.1) where ℓ(g) denotes the reduced loss function that implicitly works only with the reduced observable PKOP K and the reudced density matrix PKρP K, where PK is the projector onto 

K. By Proposition 3.3.3, the represented Krylov-Lie algebra is reductive, with orthogonal decomposition 

l = z ⊕

> m

M

> j=1

lj ,

where z is the center and each lj is a simple ideal. Let Πz : End( K) → z, Πj : End( K) → lj

denote the Hilbert-Schmidt orthogonal projections. Write 

ρz := Π z(ρ), Oz := Π z(O), ρj := Π j (ρ), Oj := Π j (O). (5.2) Without loss of generality, let ν be a probability measure on K absolutely continuous with respect to Haar measure, and write 

dν (g) = q(g) dμ K (g), q ∈ L1(K, μ K ), q ≥ 0,

Z

> K

q(g) dμ K (g) = 1 . (5.3) Next, define the centered density 

f := q − 1,

Z

> K

f (g) dμ K (g) = 0 . (5.4) For each simple component lj , define the visible first-moment correction operator 

V(1)  

> j

(f ) := 

Z

> K

dμ K (g)f (g) Ad (j) 

> g

∈ End( lj ), (5.5) 80 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

where Ad (j) 

> g

denotes the restriction of Ad g to lj . On the center z, define similarly 

V(1)  

> z

(f ) := 

Z

> K

dμ K (g)f (g) Ad (z) 

> g

∈ End( z). (5.6) Since the center is pointwise fixed by the adjoint action, we have Ad (z) 

> g

= Iz for all g ∈ K, 

and therefore 

V(1)  

> z

(f ) = 

Z 

> K

f (g) dμ K (g)



Iz = 0 .

Theorem 5.1.1 (Weighted expectation decomposition) . Assume that either ρ ∈ l or O ∈ l.Then the expectation value of the reduced loss function (Equation 5.1) with respect to ν =

q μ K (Equation 5.3) is given by 

Eν [ℓ] = Tr ρzOz

 +

> m

X

> j=1

Oj , V(1)  

> j

(f )ρj HS , (5.7) 

where the subscripts denote projection onto the simple Krylov-Lie algebra components (5.2), and the V(1)  

> j

(f ) are the visible first-moment correction operators (5.5). In particular, if q ≡ 1,equivalently f = 0 (5.4), then 

EμK [ℓ] = Tr ρzOz

. (5.8) 

If, moreover, the Lie algebra is centerless, then 

EμK [ℓ] = 0 .

Proof. We give the proof in the case O ∈ l; the case ρ ∈ l is analogous by symmetry. Decompose 

O = Oz +

> m

X

> j=1

Oj , ρ = ρz +

> m

X

> j=1

ρj + ρ⊥,

where ρ⊥ is orthogonal to l. Since O ∈ l, the orthogonal component ρ⊥ does not contribute to the Hilbert–Schmidt pairing with O. Thus 

ℓ(g) = Tr Oz Ad g(ρz) +

> m

X

> j=1

Oj , Ad (j) 

> g

(ρj ) HS .

81 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Because z is central, the adjoint action fixes it pointwise, so Ad g(ρz) = ρz for all g ∈ K. 

Hence 

ℓ(g) = Tr ρzOz

 +

> m

X

> j=1

Oj , Ad (j) 

> g

(ρj ) HS .

Now integrate against dν = q dμ K = (1 + f ) dμ K . We obtain 

Eν [ℓ] = Tr ρzOz

 +

> m

X

> j=1

Z

> K

Oj , Ad (j) 

> g

(ρj ) HS dμ K (g) + 

> m

X

> j=1

Z

> K

Oj , Ad (j) 

> g

(ρj ) HS f (g) dμ K (g).

For each simple ideal lj , the Haar first moment vanishes: 

Z

> K

Ad (j) 

> g

dμ K (g) = 0 on lj .

Indeed, the Haar first moment is the orthogonal projection onto the K-invariant vectors in the adjoint representation, and these invariants are precisely the center, which is trivial on a simple Lie algebra [37]. Therefore the middle term vanishes, and the final term becomes 

> m

X

> j=1

Oj , V(1)  

> j

(f )ρj HS .

This proves (5.7). The Haar formula (5.8) follows by setting f = 0. If the Lie algebra is centerless, then z = {0}, and so EμK [ℓ] = 0. 

Corollary 5.1.2 (Expectation gap relative to Haar) . Under the hypotheses of Theorem 5.1.1, 

Eν [ℓ] − EμK [ℓ] = 

> m

X

> j=1

Oj , V(1)  

> j

(f )ρj HS . (5.9) 

Thus every deviation of the expectation from its Haar value is carried by the centered density 

f = q − 1 through the visible first-moment correction operators V(1)  

> j

(f ).Proof. Subtract (5.8) from (5.7). 

Remark 5.1.3 (Compatibility with the Lie-algebraic Haar formula) . Theorem 5.1.1 is the Krylov-Lie weighted first-moment analogue of the usual dynamical Lie group computation for the expectation values of our loss when our distribution is Haar [37]. It is written so that compatibility with the Lie-algebraic Haar formula is immediate: the Haar expectation 82 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

is exactly the unperturbed contribution, and every non-Haar effect enters only through the centered first-moment correction operators V(1)  

> j

(f ). 

5.1.2 A Weighted Variance Formula Compatible with Haar Distributions 

We now derive a variance formula for sampling measures that are absolutely continuous with respect to the Haar measure on the Krylov–Lie group over the reduced loss (5.1). The resulting expression will again be written so as to make the Haar case manifest: when the density is constant, the correction terms vanish identically and one recovers the Lie-algebraic variance formula of Ragone et al. as a special case. As in Theorem 5.1.1, these quantities have factorially small error in the Krylov grade when compared to the original moments over the reachable manifold for the corresponding reduced loss (cf. Remark 4.2.2 and Theorem 4.3.5). Throughout this subsection, we shall employ the same conventions and variable names as in Section 5.1.1. We also write 

Pj (A) := ∥Πj (A)∥2HS (5.10) for the Hilbert–Schmidt purity of A in the j-th simple component. Moreover, we define the centered visible second-moment correction operator as 

V(2)  

> jk

(f ) := 

Z

> K

dμ K (g)f (g)  Ad (j) 

> g

⊗ Ad (k)

> g

 ∈ End( lj ⊗ lk). (5.11) 

Theorem 5.1.4 (Weighted variance decomposition over simple ideals) . Assume that either 

ρ ∈ l or O ∈ l. Then the variance of the reduced loss function ℓ(g) = Tr[ O Ad g(ρ)] (see 5.1) with respect to the measure ν = q μ K (see 5.3) is given exactly by 

Var ν (ℓ) = 

> m

X

> j=1

Pj (ρ) Pj (O)dim( lj ) +

> m

X

> j,k =1

Oj ⊗ Ok, V(2)  

> jk

(f )( ρj ⊗ ρk) HS −

> m

X

> j=1

Oj , V(1)  

> j

(f )ρj HS 

!2

,

(5.12) 

where the Pj are the lj -purities (5.10), the subscripts denote projections onto the simple components of our Krylov-Lie algebra (5.2), V(1)  

> j

(f ) is the visible first-moment correction operator (5.5), and V(2)  

> jk

(f ) is the visible second-moment correction operator (5.11). In particular, if q ≡ 1, equivalently f = 0 , then 

Var μK (ℓ) = 

> m

X

> j=1

Pj (ρ) Pj (O)dim( lj ) . (5.13) 

Proof. We give the proof in the case O ∈ l; the case ρ ∈ l follows by the same argument 83 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

after exchanging the roles of ρ and O.Since l = z ⊕ Lmj=1 lj is a reductive decomposition into pairwise orthogonal Ad-invariant ideals, we may write 

O =

> m

X

> j=1

Oj , ρ = ρz +

> m

X

> j=1

ρj + ρ⊥,

where ρz ∈ z, each ρj ∈ lj , and ρ⊥ is orthogonal to l. Since O ∈ l, the component ρ⊥ does not contribute to the Hilbert–Schmidt pairing with O, and therefore 

ℓ(g) = 

> m

X

> j=1

⟨Oj , Ad (j) 

> g

(ρj )⟩HS + ⟨O, ρ z⟩HS .

The central term is independent of g, hence contributes to the mean but not to the variance. It therefore suffices to compute the fluctuating part 

ℓfluc (g) := 

> m

X

> j=1

⟨Oj , Ad (j) 

> g

(ρj )⟩HS .

We first compute the mean. Since q = 1 + f , we have 

Eν [ℓfluc ] = 

Z

> K

ℓfluc (g) dμ K (g) + 

Z

> K

ℓfluc (g) f (g) dμ K (g).

For each simple ideal lj , the Haar average of the adjoint representation vanishes, because the only invariant vectors in the adjoint representation would lie in the center, whereas lj is simple and centerless. Hence 

Z

> K

Ad (j) 

> g

dμ K (g) = 0 on lj .

Therefore 

Eν [ℓfluc ] = 

> m

X

> j=1

Oj , V(1)  

> j

(f )ρj HS .

We next compute the second moment. Expanding the square gives 

ℓfluc (g)2 =

> m

X

> j,k =1

Oj , Ad (j) 

> g

(ρj ) HS Ok, Ad (k) 

> g

(ρk) HS .

Equivalently, 

ℓfluc (g)2 =

> m

X

> j,k =1

Oj ⊗ Ok, (Ad (j) 

> g

⊗ Ad (k) 

> g

)( ρj ⊗ ρk) HS .

84 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Integrating against q dμ K = (1 + f ) dμ K , we obtain 

Eν [ℓ2fluc ] = EμK [ℓ2fluc ] + 

> m

X

> j,k =1

Oj ⊗ Ok, V(2)  

> jk

(f )( ρj ⊗ ρk) HS .

The Haar contribution will be given by the familiar Ragone expression [37]: 

EμK [ℓ2fluc ] = 

> m

X

> j=1

Pj (ρ) Pj (O)dim( lj ) .

Combining the preceding identities with the usual formula Var ν (ℓ) = Eν [ℓ2fluc ] − Eν [ℓfluc ]2, we obtain Var ν (ℓ) = 

> m

X

> j=1

Pj (ρ) Pj (O)dim( lj ) +

> m

X

> j,k =1

Oj ⊗ Ok, V(2)  

> jk

(f )( ρj ⊗ ρk) HS −

> m

X

> j=1

Oj , V(1)  

> j

(f )ρj HS 

!2

,

which is (5.12). If q ≡ 1, then f = 0, so V(1)  

> j

(f ) = 0 and V(2)  

> jk

(f ) = 0 for all j, k , and (5.13) follows immediately. 

Remark 5.1.5 (Relation to the Lie-algebraic Haar formula) . Equation (5.12) is written so that the Haar contribution appears as the leading term and every deviation from Haar sampling is isolated into the centered visible correction operators V(1)  

> j

(f ) and V(2)  

> jk

(f ). The operator 

V(1)  

> j

(f ) records the first visible non-Haar bias of the sampling measure on the j-th simple ideal, while V(2)  

> jk

(f ) records the corresponding second-moment bias coupling the j-th and k-th simple sectors. In particular, the formula is manifestly compatible with the Lie-algebraic variance formula of Ragone et al.: the latter is recovered by the single substitution q ≡ 1. 

Corollary 5.1.6 (Variance gap relative to Haar) . Under the hypotheses of Theorem 5.1.4, 

Var ν (ℓ)−Var μK (ℓ) = 

> m

X

> j,k =1

Oj ⊗Ok, V(2)  

> jk

(f )( ρj ⊗ρk) HS −

> m

X

> j=1

Oj , V(1)  

> j

(f )ρj HS 

!2

. (5.14) 

In particular, all deviation from the Haar variance is carried by the centered density f = q−1.Proof. Subtract (5.13) from (5.12). 

Remark 5.1.7 (Main implications) . The preceding expectation and variance formulas have several noteworthy conceptual ramifications. First, they provide a canonical framework for analyzing non-Haar loss landscapes on compact Krylov-Lie groups. Since the Krylov-Lie group is compact by Theorem 3.1.1, it 85 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

carries a unique normalized Haar probability measure μK . Hence any probability measure 

ν on the group that is absolutely continuous with respect to μK admits a Radon–Nikodym density 

q = dν dμ K

,

which is uniquely determined up to μK -null sets. Consequently, the centered density 

f := q − 1is likewise canonical up to μK -null sets, and the expectation and variance decompositions depend only on the induced group-level sampling law ν, not on any auxiliary choice of coordinates or parameterization. Second, these formulas extend the Haar-analysis of Ragone et al. to a genuinely non-Haar setting. The Haar terms are recovered by the single substitution q ≡ 1, while every non-Haar effect is isolated into explicit first- and second-moment correction operators built from the centered density f . In this sense, the non-Haar theory is not an ad-hoc perturbation of the Haar case, but its natural measure-theoretic extension. Third, the formulas show that loss-landscape statistics can be studied intrinsically on the compact Krylov–Lie group itself. Once a physical or algorithmic sampling procedure induces a pushforward probability measure ν on the group, the analytically relevant object is precisely this induced measure. Different sampling protocols that yield the same pushforward law on the group therefore lead to the same expectation values, variances, and higher moment formulas. This makes the framework coordinate-free at the level of the observable statistics. Fourth, as the Krylov-Lie algebra is intentionally defined so that its dimension will cor-respond to the manifold dimension of the VQA (or potentially be even smaller), often com-pressing to work over a vector space with significantly smaller dimension than the ambient Hilbert space in the shallow-circuit regime, the dimension of the simple sectors of the KLA are far more constrained than those of the DLA. This means that the physically relevant Haar sector variance of any given variational quantum circuit is inversely proportional to effective dimensions dependent on the number of unique parameters in the circuit and the composition of the corresponding KLA. As a consequence, informally speaking, for noise-less shallow circuits whose effective dimension does not grow exponentially with N , Haar-induced barren plateaus are not expected to arise from expressivity alone; rather, under the variance formula, exponential concentration can only occur through sufficiently small generalized purity of the initial state or observable relative to the relevant simple sectors. This is compatible with the polynomially increasing variance behavior (cragged terrains) observed in the separate analysis of shallow QAOA on Max Independent Set found in joint 86 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

work [13]. More interestingly, inclusion of the centered density terms predicts that certain choices of initial parameter distributions—those that yield a variance gap (Corollary 5.1.6) asymptotically larger than the Haar part as a function of N —could at least in principle enhance the variance actually encountered during training by reweighting the visible sectors of the landscape in a manner loosely analogous to importance sampling. We stress that this observation does not contradict the standard claim that no optimizer can efficiently escape a barren plateau once optimization is taking place inside a region of exponential concentra-tion [29]. Indeed, in such a region, both gradient information and finite cost differences are exponentially suppressed, so feasible shot budgets do not suffice to distinguish neighboring points in the landscape with the fidelity required for reliable local updates [29]. However, this local obstruction does not preclude a global change in the distribution of parameters visited during training. In the present framework, a nonuniform optimizer-induced sampling density may strongly downweight barren-plateau sectors and upweight sectors with larger visible variance, so that the optimization process need not exhibit the same concentration properties as the fixed Haar reference ensemble. We leave the question of proving rigorously whether this strategy can be performed without a priori knowledge of the landscape to future work. Finally, for fixed finite moments, only finitely many representation-theoretic sectors of the density are visible to the corresponding moment operators. Thus the exact non-Haar corrections are controlled by finite-dimensional data extracted from q. This makes the prob-lem well-posed in principle and structurally amenable to explicit harmonic and Lie-theoretic computation. 

## 5.2 Deviation from Haar and Variance Bounds on the Krylov-Lie Group 

We shall now use the reduced loss to analyze the effects of the Haar deviation terms on our moments. The analogous ambient formulas too follow from straightforward calculations, but they again lack the insight and algebraic organization of the reduced formulas and so we omit them from our discussion. Let K be a compact represented Krylov–Lie group (Definition 3.2.12) acting unitarily on a finite-dimensional Krylov subspace K (Definition 3.2.8) through a unitary representation 

κ : K → U (K),

87 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

and let μK denote Haar probability measure on K. Without loss of generality, say that 

ν ≪ μK , q := dν dμ K

, f := q − 1.

Then Z

> K

f (g) dμ K (g) = 0 .

For t ∈ N and η some distribution of unitaries over K, define the t-th moment superoperator 

M(t) 

> η

(X) := 

Z

> K

κ(g)⊗t X (κ(g)†)⊗t dη (g), X ∈ End( K⊗t),

and the corresponding moment-error operator ∆(t) := M(t) 

> ν

− M (t) 

> μK

.

Equivalently, ∆(t)(X) = 

Z

> K

f (g) κ(g)⊗tX(κ(g)†)⊗t dμ K (g).

Lemma 5.2.1 (Vectorized form and Peter-Weyl block decomposition) . Let 

∆(t) = M(t) 

> ν

− M (t)

> μK

be the t-th moment-error superoperator, so that 

∆(t)(X) = 

Z

> K

f (g) κ(g)⊗tX(κ(g)†)⊗t dμ K (g), f := q − 1.

Let 

V (t) := K⊗t ⊗ K ⊗t,

and let 

vec : End( K⊗t) → V (t)

denote the standard vectorization isomorphism. Define the t-moment representation (where the overline denotes the entrywise complex conjugate) 

R(t)(g) := κ(g)⊗t ⊗ κ(g)⊗t

∈ End( V (t)).

88 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Then the vectorized error operator 

e∆(t) := vec ◦ ∆(t) ◦ vec −1

is given by 

e∆(t) =

Z

> K

dμ K (g)f (g)R(t)(g).

Moreover, if 

V (t) ∼= M

> λ∈Vis t(K)∪{ 1}

Cmλ ⊗ Vλ

is the decomposition of R(t) into irreducibles [17, Thm. 5.2], then 

e∆(t) ∼= M

> λ∈Vis t(K)∪{ 1}

Imλ ⊗ bf (λ), bf (λ) := 

Z

> K

f (g) πλ(g) dμ K (g),

and the trivial block vanishes: 

bf (1) = 0 .

Consequently, 

∥ e∆(t)∥op = αt = max  

> λ∈Vis t(K)

σmax 

  bf (λ).

Proof. Fix X ∈ End( K⊗t). We use the standard identity vec( AXB †) = ( A ⊗ B) vec( X),

valid for all operators A, B on K⊗t, where the overline denotes the entrywise complex con-jugate. Applying this with 

A = B = κ(g)⊗t

gives vec  κ(g)⊗tX(κ(g)†)⊗t =  κ(g)⊗t ⊗ κ(g)⊗tvec( X) = R(t)(g) vec( X).

Therefore, vec  ∆(t)(X) =

Z

> K

dμ K (g)f (g) vec  κ(g)⊗tX(κ(g)†)⊗t

=

Z

> K

dμ K (g)f (g)R(t)(g) vec( X).

Since V (t) is finite-dimensional, the vector vec( X) may be pulled outside the integral, yielding vec  ∆(t)(X) =

Z 

> K

dμ K (g)f (g)R(t)(g)



vec( X).

89 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

As this holds for every X, we conclude that 

e∆(t) =

Z

> K

dμ K (g)f (g)R(t)(g).

Now decompose the unitary representation R(t) into irreducibles [17, Thm. 5.2]: 

V (t) ∼= M

> λ

Cmλ ⊗ Vλ, R(t)(g) ∼= M

> λ

Imλ ⊗ πλ(g).

Substituting this into the preceding integral and integrating blockwise gives 

e∆(t) ∼= M

> λ

Imλ ⊗

Z 

> K

f (g) πλ(g) dμ K (g)



= M

> λ

Imλ ⊗ bf (λ).

For the trivial representation 1, one has 

bf (1) = 

Z

> K

f (g) dμ K (g) = 

Z

> K

(q(g) − 1) dμ K (g) = 1 − 1 = 0 .

Hence only the nontrivial visible sectors contribute. Finally, the operator norm of a block diagonal operator is the maximum of the operator norms of its blocks, and tensoring with an identity does not change singular values. Therefore 

∥ e∆(t)∥op = max  

> λ∈Vis t(K)

∥Imλ ⊗ bf (λ)∥op = max  

> λ∈Vis t(K)

∥ bf (λ)∥op = max  

> λ∈Vis t(K)

σmax 

  bf (λ).

Thus the moment-error superoperator is nothing but the noncommutative Fourier trans-form of the centered density f = q − 1, evaluated on the t-moment representation. The quantity ∥ e∆(t)∥op therefore measures the largest non-Haar Fourier block of f that is visible to t-copy observables. For a density matrix ρ and Hermitian observable O, define 

ℓg(ρ, O ) := Tr κ(g)ρκ (g)†O, m(t) 

> η

(ρ, O ) := 

Z

> K

ℓg(ρ, O )t dη (g).

Then because the moment superoperator is Hermitian [37], 

m(t) 

> η

(ρ, O ) = Tr ρ⊗t M(t) 

> η

(O⊗t),

90 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

so the scalar t-moment non-Haar for the distribution η over K is 

ε(t) 

> η

(ρ, O ) := m(t) 

> η

(ρ, O ) − m(t) 

> μK

(ρ, O ) = Tr ρ⊗t ∆(t)(O⊗t).

Proposition 5.2.2. For every t ≥ 1,

|ε(t) 

> η

(ρ, O )| ≤ αt ∥O∥t

> ∞

.

Moreover, 

|ε(t) 

> η

(ρ, O )| ≤ ∥ q − 1∥L1(μK ) ∥O∥t

> ∞

.

Proof. Since ρ is a density matrix, ∥ρ⊗t∥1 = 1. Hence 

|ε(t) 

> η

(ρ, O )| ≤ ∥ ∆(t)(O⊗t)∥∞ ≤ ∥ e∆(t)∥op ∥O⊗t∥∞ = αt ∥O∥t

> ∞

.

The L1-bound follows from 

∥∆(t)(X)∥∞ ≤

Z

> K

|f (g)| ∥ κ(g)⊗tXκ (g)†⊗ t∥∞ dμ K (g) = ∥q − 1∥L1(μK ) ∥X∥∞.

The constants αt are monotone in t, which yields a useful uniform estimate for all mo-ments up to a prescribed order. 

Proposition 5.2.3 (Monotonicity of the moment-error constants) . For every t ≥ 1,

αt ≤ αt+1 .

Consequently, for every 1 ≤ t ≤ T ,

|ε(t) 

> η

(ρ, O )| ≤ αT ∥O∥t

> ∞

.

Proof. Define 

Jt : End( K⊗t) → End( K⊗(t+1) ), Jt(X) := X ⊗ I. 

Then Jt intertwines the t- and ( t + 1)-moment actions: 

M(t+1)  

> η

◦ Jt = Jt ◦ M (t)

> η

for every probability measure η on K, because by the mixed-product property of the tensor 91 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

product (κ(g)⊗t ⊗ κ(g))( X ⊗ I)(( κ(g)†)⊗t ⊗ κ(g)†) =  κ(g)⊗tX(κ(g)†)⊗t ⊗ I. 

Subtracting the Haar and ansatz moment operators gives ∆(t+1) ◦ Jt = Jt ◦ ∆(t).

Now Jt is an isometric embedding for the operator norm, since 

∥X ⊗ I∥∞ = ∥X∥∞∥I∥∞ = ∥X∥∞.

Therefore, for every X̸ = 0, 

∥∆(t)(X)∥∞

∥X∥∞

= ∥Jt(∆ (t)(X)) ∥∞

∥Jt(X)∥∞

= ∥∆(t+1) (Jt(X)) ∥∞

∥Jt(X)∥∞

≤ ∥ ∆(t+1) ∥∞→∞ .

Taking the supremum over X̸ = 0 yields 

∥∆(t)∥∞→∞ ≤ ∥ ∆(t+1) ∥∞→∞ .

Since αt = ∥ e∆(t)∥op = ∥∆(t)∥∞→∞ , we obtain 

αt ≤ αt+1 .

The final estimate follows immediately. Since Var η(ℓρ,O ) = m(2)  

> η

(ρ, O ) −  m(1)  

> η

(ρ, O )2,

we obtain the following comparison with the Haar variance. 

Corollary 5.2.4. One has 

Var ν (ℓg(ρ, O )) − Var μK (ℓg(ρ, O )) ≤  α2 + 2 α1

∥O∥2 

> ∞

≤ 3α2 ∥O∥2

> ∞

.

In addition, 

Var ν (ℓg(ρ, O )) − Var μK (ℓg(ρ, O )) ≤ 3 ∥q − 1∥L1(μK ) ∥O∥2

> ∞

.

92 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Proof. We have Var ν (ℓρ,O ) − Var μK (ℓρ,O ) = ε(2)  

> ν

(ρ, O ) −  m(1)  

> ν

(ρ, O ) − m(1)  

> μK

(ρ, O )  m(1)  

> ν

(ρ, O ) + m(1)  

> μK

(ρ, O ).

Also, because ρ is a density matrix, by the von Neumann-H¨ older inequalities for the trace, 

|ℓg(ρ, O )| ≤ ∥ O∥∞, |m(1)  

> ν

(ρ, O )| ≤ ∥ O∥∞, |m(1)  

> μK

(ρ, O )| ≤ ∥ O∥∞.

Hence 

Var ν (ℓg(ρ, O )) − Var μK (ℓg(ρ, O )) ≤ | ε(2)  

> ν

(ρ, O )| + 2 ∥O∥∞|ε(1)  

> ν

(ρ, O )|.

Applying the previous propositions gives 

Var ν (ℓg(ρ, O )) − Var μK (ℓg(ρ, O )) ≤ (α2 + 2 α1)∥O∥2 

> ∞

≤ 3α2∥O∥2

> ∞

,

and likewise for the L1-bound. 

5.2.1 Comparison with Ragone et al. 

This inequality plays the same role as the approximate-design correction in Ragone et al.: the Haar variance is computed exactly first, and one then bounds the difference between the actual variance and the Haar variance by controlling lower-order moment errors. In the present setting, the correction is governed exactly by the visible Peter-Weyl blocks of the centered density q − 1 of the ansatz measure expressed relative to Haar on the represented Krylov-Lie group, through the constants 

αt = max  

> λ∈Vis t(K)

σmax 

  bf (λ),

or more coarsely by ∥q − 1∥L1(μK ). To reemphasize, however, there is of course a factorially small error of these calculations when compared to moments over the original circuits (see Theorem 4.3.5); by ”exact”, we mean that non-Haar terms are directly computed by our theory and the omission of their data is not a part of our approximation scheme. 

## 5.3 Variance Inequalities, Non-Haar Asymptotics, and the Failure of Lemma 6 

At first sight, the error inequalities derived in Corollary 5.2.4 suggest a possibility that may seem to run against the standard intuition in the barren-plateau literature. Indeed, our 93 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

bounds are naturally expressed in terms of the visible Fourier content of the sampling error, and therefore they leave open the possibility that certain choices of parameter distribution and dynamical Lie algebra may systematically retain nontrivial visible components, even in the large-depth limit, rather than washing out to the Haar moment operator. Put differently, the structure of our estimates already suggests that there may exist ans¨ atze whose asymptotic sampling measure is not driven to Haar on the represented group, because some visible sector is not mixed at all. This appears, at least superficially, to conflict with a common heuristic assumption, made particularly explicit in Ragone et al.’s Theorem 2, that sufficiently increasing the depth should force the circuit ensemble toward an approximate G t -design. In their notation, if EL

is the ensemble generated by an L-layer circuit and 

A(t) 

> EL

= M(t) 

> EL

− M (t) 

> G

,

then Theorem 2 asserts that EL becomes an ε-approximate G t -design once 

L ≥ log(1 /ε )log  1/∥A (t) 

> E1

∥∞

.

Thus the philosophy is that depth alone should eventually force convergence to the Haar 

t-moment operator. However, this conclusion is not valid in full generality. The issue is with the strict-contraction input used to make useful the formal algebraic identity 

A(t) 

> EL

=  A(t)

> E1

L.

More precisely, the proof of Theorem 2 relies on Lemma 6 of Ragone et al., which claims that every eigenvalue of the single-layer moment operator on the orthogonal complement p

of the G-invariant sector has modulus strictly less than 1. Once that statement fails, one no longer obtains ∥A (t) 

> E1

∥∞ < 1, and the claimed universal exponential convergence to Haar breaks down. The cycle graph QAOA on Max Cut example provides a pedagogical counterexample to precisely this step. In that setting, one finds a nontrivial visible sector outside the G-invariants on which the one-layer averaging operator may have eigenvalue 1 under certain choices of measure on the ensemble. Consequently, the associated component of the t-moment error is not damped by increasing depth, so the ensemble does not converge to the Haar t-moment operator on the full represented group. This shows that Lemma 6 of Ragone et al.—and therefore their Theorem 2—cannot hold without additional hypotheses excluding 94 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

such unmixed visible sectors. The rigorous details of this counterexample are available in Appendix A. Conceptually, the underlying obstruction is very simple: the averaging measure may an-nihilate many visible modes while leaving others untouched. Even if the sampling measure has positive density almost everywhere with respect to Haar, convergence to Haar still fails whenever there exists a nontrivial visible representation sector on which the moment oper-ator is not strictly contractive. Since Haar convergence requires decay of every nontrivial Fourier mode, the survival of a single such mode is sufficient to obstruct convergence. In the especially transparent abelian situation, this happens through characters. If χ is a one-dimensional unitary character of a visible block and ν is the sampling measure, then the corresponding averaged eigenvalue is 

λν =

Z

χ(g) dν (g), |λν | ≤ 1.

The equality case is rigid: λν = 1 holds if and only if χ(g) = 1 for ν-almost every g. Hence there is no requirement that ν be supported on a discrete set. It is enough that the support of ν lie inside the kernel of the visible character. This is important for interpreting the counterexample correctly. The phenomenon is not an artifact of finitely supported parameter distributions (as is seen). One may equally well choose measures with continuous support on a nontrivial interval and still obtain eigenvalue 1, provided that the relevant visible character restricts to 1 throughout that interval. More generally, if π is a unitary representation and 

Z 

π(g) dν (g)



v = v, 

then equality in the norm-convexity argument forces π(g)v = v for ν-almost every g. Thus the real obstruction is not discreteness but support inside a stabilizer, or equivalently inside the kernel of a visible representation sector. This of particular relevance to semisimple sectors, which could still in principle fail to contract when the sampling measure is supported in the stabilizer of a nontrivial visible subspace, despite the fact that such sectors only admit trivial characters. To be clear, this would not mean that the vector v is a G-invariant, but that it has a nontrivial stabilizer in G from which ν samples almost all of its elements. From the perspective of the present theory, this possibility is not surprising at all. Our operator-level error formulas isolate exactly the visible Fourier blocks present in ∆(t) = M(t) 

> ν

− M (t) 

> μK

,

95 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

so they immediately suggest that asymptotic non-Haar behavior can occur whenever the sampling rule fails to suppress some visible block. In other words, the error inequalities do not merely permit such counterexamples; they almost advertise them. A visible character, or more generally a visible irreducible block, that remains fixed under the sampling measure is precisely the sort of mechanism our framework is designed to detect. More generally, the same representation-theoretic mechanism suggests analogous obstructions for singular sampling laws, although that regime lies outside the Radon–Nikodym formalism developed in Section 5.1. This also clarifies the sense in which the present framework is sharper than design-only criteria. A design-centric inequality for a particular loss might reveal that some scalar quantity fails to concentrate as predicted, but it does not directly identify the representation-theoretic mechanism behind this phenomenon and may in fact neglect convergence behavior of higher-order moments. This is because a design-centric inequality necessarily forgets the representation-theoretic structure inherent to ν expressed as a measure relative to μK .By contrast, the moment-error superoperator with the appropriate Krylov-Lie reductions exhibits the offending sector explicitly. In the cycle-graph QAOA counterexample, the failure of approximate-design convergence is therefore seen not as an accidental pathology, but as the natural consequence of an undamped visible block, made transparent by the Peter-Weyl form of our error bounds. The significance of this obstruction cannot be understated. Without depth-dependent Haar convergence, much of contemporary VQA theory cannot be unconditionally applied to the overwhelming majority of realistic circuits (nor can said theory be properly understood as working within universal asymptotic regimes), especially Ragone et al. and Anschuetz [2, 37], who require ε-approximate t-design convergence to an asymptotic structure for their formulas to be applicable. In contrast, the Krylov-Lie construction explicitly allows one to find groups that inherently approximate the initial manifold and its parameter distribution in a canonical fashion, and then relate the difference via the Radon-Nikodym derivative, thereby overcoming these limitations. 96 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

## CHAPTER 6 AN OBSERVABLE KAWADA–IT ˆ O THEOREM 

As it turns out, there is a classical result from the ergodic theory of random walks on compact groups that allows us to recover the claimed convergence of Ragone et al. under the right conditions: the Kawada–Itˆ o theorem [27], in the sharpened form due to Stromberg [40] (see also [4] for a modern textbook treatment, and [32] for the Ces` aro-averaged variant). Some care is required, however, in identifying the group on which the ergodic hypotheses must be imposed. The t-th moment operators of an ensemble only probe the matrix coefficients of the balanced tensor-power representations g 7 → g⊗t ⊗ g⊗t; irreducible representations of the dynamical Lie group that are nontrivial on its subgroup of global phases occur in no balanced power and are therefore invisible to moments of every order. Consequently, no support condition on the dynamical Lie group itself can be necessary for moment convergence, and the Peter–Weyl algebra of all matrix coefficients is strictly larger than what t-copy experiments can see. The correct formulation lives on a canonical quotient, the observable group , on which the visible coefficients are uniformly dense and the Kawada–Itˆ o conditions become necessary and sufficient. We develop this formulation in detail in the present chapter. Throughout this chapter, G ⊆ U (d) denotes a compact subgroup (automatically a closed Lie subgroup, by Cartan’s closed-subgroup theorem) and 

ρ : G −→ U (H), dim C H = dρ < ∞,

a continuous unitary representation. In our applications, G is the compact dynamical Lie group generated by the DLA g ⊆ u(d), H is the N -qubit Hilbert space, and ρ is the defining representation. We write H for the conjugate Hilbert space and A for the entrywise complex conjugate of an operator or vector with respect to this basis, consistent with the conventions of Section 5.2. For each integer t ≥ 0 define the balanced t-th tensor-power representation 

ρ(t)(g) := ρ(g)⊗t ⊗ ρ(g)⊗t

∈ U Ht

, Ht := H⊗t ⊗ H ⊗t, (6.1) with the convention that ρ(0) is the trivial representation on H0 = C. Under the vectorization isomorphism vec : End( H⊗t) → H t of Section 5.2, the representation ρ(t) is precisely the matrix of the t-fold conjugation superoperator X 7 → ρ(g)⊗tX(ρ(g)†)⊗t, i.e. the analogue for 97 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

G of the representation R(t) used there for the Krylov–Lie group. All measures below are Borel probability measures; since G is a compact metrizable group, every Borel probability measure on G is automatically Radon [18, Ch. 7], and its support supp μ (the smallest closed set of full measure) is well defined and nonempty. For probability measures μ, ν on G, the convolution μ ∗ ν is the pushforward of μ ⊗ ν under the multiplication map, and we write μ∗L for the L-fold convolution power. Given a closed subset S ⊆ G, we write [ S] for the smallest closed subgroup of G containing S. Finally, μG

denotes the normalized Haar probability measure of G.Since dim Ht = d2tρ < ∞, all norms on our space are equivalent, with constants depending only on t and dρ; in particular, for fixed t, convergence of moment operators in the operator norm ∥ · ∥ ∞, in any Schatten norm, or in the induced Schatten p → p norms of the associated superoperators are all equivalent notions (for p = 2 the vectorization vec is a unitary between Hilbert–Schmidt space and H⊗t ⊗ H ⊗t, so the identification is even isometric). We therefore state convergence in ∥ · ∥ ∞ and use the other norms freely. 

Definition 6.0.1 (Observable moment algebra) . For t ≥ 0 let 

Ft := 

n

g 7 → V, ρ (t)(g) W V, W ∈ H t

o

⊆ C(G)be the space of matrix coefficients of ρ(t), and set 

F := [

> t≥0

Ft, A := span C F.

We call A the observable moment algebra of the pair ( G, ρ ). This title is motivated in Appendix B, specifically Lemma B.0.1. Two comments on this definition are in order. First, since every subrepresentation π ⊆

ρ(t) embeds isometrically into Ht, the matrix coefficients of subrepresentations of ρ(t) already belong to Ft (cf. Appendix B for greater detail); conversely, decomposing ρ(t) into irreducibles exhibits every element of Ft as a finite sum of coefficients of irreducible subrepresentations. Hence defining Ft via subrepresentations, as one might prefer, yields the same span. Second, the name is justified by the observation that A contains exactly the t-copy loss statistics of the ansatz: for any density matrix ϱ, observable O, and t ≥ 1, the function 

g 7 −→ ℓg(ϱ, O )t = Tr ρ(g)ϱρ (g)†Ot =

D

vec  O⊗t, ρ (t)(g) vec  ϱ⊗tE

lies in Ft, and conversely Ft is spanned by such functions with ϱ⊗t, O ⊗t replaced by arbitrary operators on H⊗t. Thus A is precisely the function system on G accessible to t-th order 98 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

moment experiments, uniformly in t.We now identify the canonical compact group on which A becomes a full function algebra. 

Definition 6.0.2 (Observable group) . Let Φ := ρ(1) : G −→ U  H ⊗ H , Φ( g) = ρ(g) ⊗ ρ(g),

and define the observable group of the pair ( G, ρ ) as 

Gobs := Φ( G) ⊆ U  H ⊗ H .

Given a probability measure μ on G, its observable pushforward is the probability measure 

μobs := Φ ∗μ on Gobs , defined by Φ ∗μ(B) = μ(Φ −1(B)) for Borel B ⊆ Gobs .Since Φ is a continuous homomorphism, Φ( G) is a compact, hence closed, subgroup of the ambient unitary group, and it is again a compact Lie group. Under vectorization, Φ( g)is the matrix of the unitary channel X 7 → ρ(g)Xρ (g)†, so Gobs is canonically the image of 

G in the projective unitary group P U (H), i.e. the group of channels implemented by the ansatz. The next lemma collects its basic properties. 

Lemma 6.0.3 (Structure of the observable group) . Let 

Z := ρ−1 T · I = {g ∈ G | ρ(g) ∈ T · I},

where T = λ ∈ C |λ| = 1 . Then: (a) ker Φ = Z = T 

> t≥1

ker ρ(t), and Z is a closed normal subgroup of G containing the global phases G ∩ T · I of the defining representation (with equality Z = G ∩ T · I when ρ is the defining inclusion G ⊆ U (H)). (b) Φ induces an isomorphism of compact groups 

G/Z ∼= Gobs ,

and for every t ≥ 0 there is a unique continuous unitary representation 

eρ(t) : Gobs → U (Ht)

with 

ρ(t) = eρ(t) ◦ Φ.

99 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

(c) For probability measures μ, ν on G:

Φ∗(μ ∗ ν) = Φ ∗μ ∗ Φ∗ν, 

supp(Φ ∗μ) = Φ(supp μ),

and 

Φ([ S]) = [Φ( S)] for every closed S ⊆ G. 

(d) Φ∗μG = μGobs , the normalized Haar measure of Gobs .(e) For every t ≥ 0 and every probability measure μ on G,

M(t) 

> μ

=

Z

> Gobs

eρ(t)(x) d(Φ ∗μ)( x) = dΦ∗μ eρ(t),

the noncommutative Fourier coefficient of the pushforward at eρ(t).Proof. (a) If Φ( g) = I then, by vectorization, 

ρ(g)Xρ (g)† = X for all X ∈ End( H),

so ρ(g) lies in the commutant of the full matrix algebra and is therefore a scalar unitary, 

ρ(g) = λI with |λ| = 1 .

Conversely, if ρ(g) = λI then 

ρ(t)(g) = λt ¯λt I = I for every t ≥ 1.

This proves both equalities in (a). Normality and closedness are clear, since Z is the kernel of a continuous homomorphism. (b) The induced map 

G/Z −→ Gobs 

is a continuous bijective homomorphism between compact Hausdorff groups, hence a home-omorphic isomorphism. Since ker Φ = Z ⊆ ker ρ(t) by (a), the representation ρ(t) factors uniquely through G/Z ∼=

Gobs , defining eρ(t). Continuity of eρ(t) follows because G → G/Z is an open quotient map (equivalently, because eρ(t) is obtained by composing with the inverse of the homeomorphism 

G/Z ∼= Gobs ). 100 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

(c) The first identity holds because Φ is a homomorphism: pushforward along Φ of the multiplication map of G is the multiplication map of Gobs applied to the pushforwards. Explicitly, Φ∗(μ ∗ ν) = Φ ∗μ ∗ Φ∗ν. 

For the support identity, Φ(supp μ) is compact (hence closed) and carries full Φ ∗μ-measure. Conversely, if U ⊆ Gobs is open with U ∩ Φ(supp μ)̸ = ∅, then Φ −1(U ) is open and meets supp μ. Hence Φ∗μ(U ) ≥ μ(Φ −1(U )) > 0.

This shows supp(Φ ∗μ) = Φ(supp μ).

For the third claim, Φ([ S]) is a compact (closed) subgroup containing Φ( S), so [Φ( S)] ⊆ Φ([ S]) .

Conversely, Φ −1([Φ( S)]) is a closed subgroup containing S, hence containing [ S]. Applying Φ gives Φ([ S]) ⊆ [Φ( S)] .

Thus Φ([ S]) = [Φ( S)]. (d) The pushforward Φ ∗μG is a probability measure on Gobs invariant under left trans-lation by every element of Φ( G) = Gobs . Indeed, for any h ∈ G, the translate of Φ ∗μG by Φ( h) equals Φ ∗ applied to the translate of μG by h, which leaves μG invariant. By unique-ness of normalized Haar measure on a compact group [17, Thm. 2.10, 2.20], we must have Φ∗μG = μGobs .(e) Let t ≥ 0 and let μ be a probability measure on G.By part (b), 

ρ(t) = eρ(t) ◦ Φ.

Therefore 

M(t) 

> μ

=

Z

> G

ρ(t)(g) dμ (g) = 

Z

> G

eρ(t)(Φ( g)) dμ (g) = 

Z

> Gobs

eρ(t)(x) d(Φ ∗μ)( x),

which is the noncommutative Fourier coefficient dΦ∗μ(eρ(t)). This proves (e). We next tackle ergodic hypotheses on the observable group. 101 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Definition 6.0.4 (Adaptedness and strict aperiodicity) . Let K be a compact group and ν

a probability measure on K. We say that (a) ν is adapted if [supp ν] = K;(b) ν is strictly aperiodic if there exists no proper closed normal subgroup N ◁ K , N̸ = K,and element x ∈ K such that supp ν ⊆ xN .A probability measure μ on G is called observably adapted (resp. observably strictly aperiodic )if its observable pushforward Φ ∗μ is adapted (resp. strictly aperiodic) on Gobs .We emphasize that in (b) the subgroup N is required to be proper , but may perfectly well be trivial: the case N = {e} excludes point masses δx (whose convolution powers δxL

never converge to Haar measure on a nontrivial group), while allowing N = K would make the condition vacuously false for every measure. Strict aperiodicity neither implies nor is implied by adaptedness; the classical Kawada–Itˆ o theorem requires both [4, 27, 40]. The hypotheses of adaptedness and strict aperiodicity at the level of G are strictly stronger than the observable ones: 

Lemma 6.0.5 (Descent of the ergodic hypotheses) . If μ is adapted on G, then μ is observably adapted; if μ is strictly aperiodic on G, then μ is observably strictly aperiodic. Neither converse holds in general. Proof. Write ν = Φ ∗μ. If [supp μ] = G, then by Lemma 6.0.3(c), [supp ν] = [Φ(supp μ)] = Φ([supp μ]) = Φ( G) = Gobs .

For the second claim we argue by contraposition. Suppose supp ν ⊆ ¯x ¯N for some proper closed normal ¯N ◁ G obs and ¯ x ∈ Gobs . Put N := Φ −1( ¯N ), a closed normal subgroup of G,and pick x ∈ Φ−1({¯x}). Then N is proper (else ¯N = Φ( N ) = Gobs by surjectivity of Φ), and supp μ ⊆ Φ−1  supp ν ⊆ Φ−1(¯ x ¯N ) = xN, 

where the first inclusion holds because μ Φ−1(supp ν) = ν(supp ν) = 1 and Φ −1(supp ν) is closed. Hence μ is not strictly aperiodic on G.We first record the equivalence between moment convergence and weak-∗ convergence relative to the observable algebra. This part requires no convolution structure whatsoever and holds for arbitrary sequences of measures; it is the rigorous form of the “moment-operator/observable correspondence.” 102 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Proposition 6.0.6 (Moment–observable correspondence) . Let (μL)L∈N be any sequence of probability measures on G and let μ∞ be a probability measure on G. The following are equivalent: (ii) for every t ≥ 1, M(t) 

> μL

− M (t)  

> μ∞∞

−→ 0 as L → ∞ ;(iii) for every f ∈ A ,

Z

> G

f dμ L −→ 

Z

> G

f dμ ∞ as L → ∞ ;(iv) Φ∗μL −→ Φ∗μ∞ in the weak-∗ topology of C(Gobs )∗, that is to say, R 

> Gobs

h d (Φ ∗μL) →

R 

> Gobs

h d (Φ ∗μ∞) for every h ∈ C(Gobs ).Proof. (ii) ⇒ (iii). Let f ∈ F t, say f (g) = ⟨V, ρ (t)(g)W ⟩. Then for every probability measure 

μ on G, interchanging the (entrywise, finite-dimensional) integral with the inner product, 

Z

> G

f dμ = V, M(t) 

> μ

W , (6.2) whence Z

> G

f dμ L −

Z

> G

f dμ ∞ ≤ ∥ V ∥ ∥ W ∥ M(t) 

> μL

− M (t)  

> μ∞∞

−→ 0.

The case of general f ∈ A follows by linearity, since A = span S 

> t

Ft (no products need be considered separately, by Lemma B.0.1). (iii) ⇒ (ii). Fix t and apply (iii) to the d2tρ × d2tρ matrix coefficients g 7 → ⟨ ei, ρ (t)(g)ej ⟩ ∈ Ft, where ( ei) is an orthonormal basis of Ht. By (6.2) this gives entrywise convergence 

M(t) 

> μL

→ M (t) 

> μ∞

, which on this finite-dimensional space implies convergence in norm. (iii) ⇔ (iv). By Lemma B.0.2 and the change-of-variables formula, for f = ef ◦ Φ ∈ A ,

Z

> G

f dμ L =

Z

> Gobs

ef d (Φ ∗μL),

Z

> G

f dμ ∞ =

Z

> Gobs

ef d (Φ ∗μ∞),

so (iv) ⇒ (iii) is immediate since ef ∈ C(Gobs ). Conversely, assume (iii), let h ∈ C(Gobs ) and 

ε > 0. By Lemma B.0.2(a) choose ef ∈ eA with ∥h − ef ∥∞ ≤ ε. Since Φ ∗μL and Φ ∗μ∞ are probability measures, 

Z

h d (Φ ∗μL) −

Z

h d (Φ ∗μ∞) ≤ 2ε +

Zef d (Φ ∗μL) −

Zef d (Φ ∗μ∞) ,

and the last term tends to 0 by (iii) applied to f = ef ◦ Φ ∈ A . As ε was arbitrary, (iv) follows. We can now state and prove the observable Kawada–Itˆ o criterion for convergence to the DLG t-design hierarchy. 103 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Theorem 6.0.7 (Observable Kawada–Itˆ o criterion for convergence to the DLG t-design hierarchy) . Let G ⊆ U (d) be the compact Lie group generated by the DLA g, let ρ be as above, and let E1 be the single-layer ensemble, viewed as a probability measure on G. For 

L ≥ 1 define 

EL := E∗L 

> 1

, ν := Φ ∗E1, P (t) := M(t) 

> μG

.

The following are equivalent: (i) E1 is observably adapted and observably strictly aperiodic, i.e. ν is adapted and strictly aperiodic on Gobs ;(ii) for every t ≥ 1,

A(t)  

> EL∞

= M(t) 

> EL

− P (t) 

> ∞

−→ 0 (L → ∞ ); 

(iii) for every f ∈ A , Z

> G

f d EL −→ 

Z

> G

f dμ G (L → ∞ ); 

(iv) 

Φ∗EL = ν∗L −→ μGobs 

in the weak-∗ topology of C(Gobs )∗.Moreover, if these conditions hold, then for each t ≥ 1,

rt := max 

n

|λ| : λ ∈ spec  M(t)

> E1

 \ { 1}

o

< 1, (6.3) 

with the convention rt := 0 if the set is empty, and 

ker  M(t) 

> E1

− I = ran P (t).

Hence, for every r ∈ (rt, 1) , there exists Ct,r > 0 such that 

A(t)  

> EL∞

≤ Ct,r rL for all L ≥ 1, (6.4) 

and therefore 

L ≥ log Ct,r + log(1 /ε )log(1 /r ) =⇒ A(t)  

> EL∞

≤ ε. (6.5) 

If, in addition, E1 is symmetric in the sense that 

E1(B) = E1(B−1) for every Borel B ⊆ G, 

104 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

then M(t) 

> E1

is self-adjoint for the Hilbert–Schmidt inner product, and hence 

A(t)  

> EL∞

= A(t) 

> E1
> L
> ∞

= r Lt for all L ≥ 1. (6.6) 

Equivalently, 

L ≥ log(1 /ε )log  1/∥A (t) 

> E1

∥∞

 =⇒ A(t)  

> EL∞

≤ ε. (6.7) 

Proof. Write 

Mt := M(t) 

> E1

, Pt := P (t) = M(t) 

> μG

.

By Lemma 6.0.3(c)–(e), for every probability measure μ on G,Φ∗(μ ∗ ν′) = Φ ∗μ ∗ Φ∗ν′, Φ∗μG = μK , M(t) 

> μ

= dΦ∗μ eρ(t). (6.8) In particular, Φ∗EL = (Φ ∗E1)∗L = ν∗L. (6.9) Next, by Ragone’s convolution identity for moment operators [37], 

M(t) 

> EL

= ( Mt)L. (6.10) Also, by Haar averaging [37], 

Pt =

Z

> G

ρ(t)(g) dμ G(g) (6.11) is the orthogonal projection onto (Ht)G := {v ∈ H t | ρ(t)(g)v = v ∀g ∈ G}.

Hence 

MtPt = PtMt = Pt. (6.12) Combining (6.10) and (6.12), 

A(t) 

> EL

= M(t) 

> EL

− Pt = ( Mt)L − Pt = ( Mt − Pt)L =  A(t)

> E1

L. (6.13) 

(i) ⇔ (iv). By (6.9), condition (iv) is exactly 

ν∗L −→ μK weak-* on Gobs .

This is precisely the classical Kawada–Itˆ o theorem on the compact group Gobs ([27]; more 105 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

generally [40]), so (iv) holds if and only if ν is adapted and strictly aperiodic, i.e. if and only if (i) holds. 

(ii) ⇔ (iii) ⇔ (iv). This is Proposition 6.0.6, applied with 

μL = EL, μ∞ = μG,

using (6.9) and Φ ∗μG = μGobs from (6.8). This proves the equivalence of (ii), (iii), and (iv), hence of all four conditions. 

General quantitative estimate. Assume now that the equivalent conditions hold, and fix 

t ≥ 1. By Lemma 6.0.3(e), 

Mt = bν eρ(t). (6.14) Since ν is adapted and strictly aperiodic on Gobs , Lemma B.0.3, applied to eρ(t), implies that every eigenvalue of Mt on the unit circle is equal to 1, and that the 1-eigenspace is exactly the subspace of Gobs -invariant vectors. Because eρ(t) ◦ Φ = ρ(t) and Φ is onto, this is precisely (Ht)G, hence ker( Mt − I) = ( Ht)G = ran Pt. (6.15) Therefore A(t) 

> E1

= Mt −Pt vanishes on ran Pt, while on ran( I −Pt) it agrees with the restriction 

Mt ran( I−Pt).

By (6.15), this restriction has no eigenvalue of modulus 1. Since Ht is finite-dimensional, it follows that 

r



A(t)

> E1



= rt < 1,

where rt is the quantity in (6.3). Gelfand’s formula and enlargement of constants over finitely many initial powers therefore yields: for every r ∈ (rt, 1) there is a Ct,r > 0 such that 

 A(t)

> E1

L 

> ∞

≤ Ct,r rL for all L ≥ 1. (6.16) Combining (6.16) with (6.13) gives (6.4). Thus, if 

L ≥ log Ct,r + log(1 /ε )log(1 /r ) ,

then Ct,r rL ≤ ε, proving (6.5). Now assume in addition that 

E1(B) = E1(B−1) for every Borel B ⊆ G. 

106 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Under what amounts to this condition, Ragone et al. proves that Mt = M(t) 

> E1

is self-adjoint with respect to the Hilbert–Schmidt inner product [37]. Since Pt is an orthogonal projection and MtPt = PtMt = Pt, the operator 

A(t) 

> E1

= Mt − Pt

is also self-adjoint. Hence its operator norm equals its spectral radius, so 

A(t)  

> E1∞

= r



A(t)

> E1



= rt < 1.

Using (6.13), 

A(t) 

> EL

=  A(t)

> E1

L,

and self-adjointness gives 

A(t)  

> EL∞

= A(t) 

> E1
> L
> ∞

= rLt ,

which is (6.6). The depth bound (6.7) is then immediate. 

Remark 6.0.8 . These hypotheses are not abstract: for a randomized QAOA model with full-support angle sampling, the one-layer measure is adapted and strictly aperiodic on the compact group generated by the DLA even before considering the observable group, so the convolution powers converge to Haar in the L → ∞ limit by Lemma 6.0.5 (see Section B.0.4). In fact, by essentially the same argument as Section B.0.4, it is not hard to see that any fully-supported angle sampling law on the corresponding compact parameter torus for a one-layer VQA will converge as a channel ensemble to Haar over the dynamical Lie group as 

L → ∞ . That said, since in algorithmic design we are not constrained to keep our measure the same layer-by-layer nor possess observable adaptedness or observable strict aperiodicity (for instance, one could selectively decide which subset of layers to optimize with a Bayesian algorithm), for if this is what instills a deadly Haar convergence, then we should simply avoid strategies that implicitly permit such choices of measure. Relatedly, when Fontana et al. prove approximate 2-design mixing for a specific random-ized LASA construction obtained by sampling from an orthogonal basis of DLA generators with uniformly distributed angles over full periods, they also explicitly note, immediately after their Theorem 2.6, that this assumption of approximate 2-design mixing may fail for other initialization schemes or correlated parameters [19]. This result, Theorem 6.0.7, shows precisely when this is the case. The following practical criterion reduces the verification of (i) to a character computation, in the spirit of the abelian character discussion of Section 5.3. 107 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Corollary 6.0.9 (Character test for the observable hypotheses) . Let ν = Φ ∗E1 be the observ-able pushforward of the one-layer law, viewed as a probability measure on Gobs , and suppose 

ν is adapted. Then ν is strictly aperiodic if and only if 

Z

> Gobs

χ(x) dν (x) < 1 for every nontrivial continuous character χ : Gobs → T.

Equivalently, E1 satisfies condition (i) of Theorem 6.0.7 if and only if 

[supp Φ ∗E1] = Gobs 

and no nontrivial continuous character of Gobs has unit-modulus mean under Φ∗E1.Proof. ( ⇒ ) Suppose there exists a nontrivial character χ : Gobs → T with |bν(χ)| = 1. Then bν(χ) = λ for some λ ∈ C with |λ| = 1; this is exactly the one-dimensional case of a unit-modulus eigenvalue. By Lemma B.0.3(b) applied to the representation χ, we must have 

χ(x) ≡ λ for all x ∈ supp ν. 

Fix x0 ∈ supp ν. For any x ∈ supp ν,

χ(x−10 x) = χ(x0) χ(x) = λ λ = 1 .

Hence x−10 x ∈ ker χ, so supp ν ⊆ x0 ker χ. 

Since χ is nontrivial, ker χ is a proper closed normal subgroup of Gobs . Thus ν is supported in a coset of a proper closed normal subgroup, so ν is not strictly aperiodic. 

(⇐ ) Conversely, suppose ν is not strictly aperiodic. Then there exist a proper closed normal subgroup N ◁ G obs and some x0 ∈ Gobs such that supp ν ⊆ x0N. 

Let 

q : Gobs → Q := Gobs /N 

be the quotient map. Then 

q  supp ν = {¯x0},

108 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

where ¯ x0 = q(x0). Since ν is adapted, [supp ν] = Gobs ,

and therefore 

Q = q [supp ν] = q(supp ν) = [ {¯x0}].

In other words, Q is the closure of the cyclic subgroup generated by ¯ x0. Hence Q is a non-trivial compact abelian group. Every nontrivial compact abelian group admits a nontrivial continuous character η : Q → T (see, e.g., [17, Cor. 4.41 or Thm. 5.11]). Define 

χ := η ◦ q : Gobs → T.

Then χ is a nontrivial continuous character of Gobs . Moreover, for any x ∈ x0N ,

χ(x) = η(q(x)) = η(¯ x0),

so χ is constant on x0N , and in particular constant on supp ν ⊆ x0N . Therefore 

Z

> Gobs

χ(x) dν (x) = |η(¯ x0)| = 1 .

Thus failure of strict aperiodicity produces a nontrivial character with unit-modulus mean. This proves the contrapositive of the desired implication. 

Remark 6.0.10 (Consistency with the counterexample of Appendix A) . Corollary 6.0.9 places the cycle-graph QAOA counterexample of Appendix A in its natural context. There, the central torus of the DLA gives rise to genuinely visible one-dimensional character sectors of the represented group—characters of Gobs in the present language, since they occur in-side the balanced representations ρ(t)—and the offending parameter distributions are exactly those whose observable pushforward has unit-modulus mean on such a character. By The-orem 6.0.7, this is not merely a counterexample to Lemma 6 of [37]: it identifies the only 

mechanism by which an observably adapted ensemble can fail to converge to the design hi-erarchy. Invisible sectors (characters of G nontrivial on the phase kernel Z) are, by contrast, irrelevant to design convergence—they cannot obstruct it, but their mixing can also never be certified by moments. 109 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

## 6.1 Implications and Interpretation of Observable Kawada-Itˆ o

The preceding discussion and proof of Theorem 6.0.7 shows that, under the observable adaptedness and observable strict aperiodicity hypotheses of observable Kawada–Itˆ o (or more strictly, by Lemma 6.0.5, adaptedness and strict aperiodicity), repeated convolution of the one-layer sampling measure converges to the Haar measure on the compact Lie group generated by the underlying dynamical Lie algebra. In particular, if μ1,N denotes the one-layer measure for an N -qubit variational architecture and GN denotes the corresponding compact dynamical Lie group, then for each fixed system size N one has 

μ∗L 

> 1,N

−−−→ 

> L→∞

μGN

in the weak sense with respect to the observable moment algebra, and hence the associated moment operators converge to their Haar values. Consequently, the Lie-algebraic variance formula of Ragone et al. over the dynamical Lie group is asymptotically recovered whenever the hypotheses of observable Kawada-Itˆ o are satisfied. It is important, however, not to overinterpret this asymptotic statement. The convergence just described is a limit in the circuit depth L for each fixed N ; it is not a statement that a single depth bound, or even a single approximation error ε, may be chosen uniformly in the system size. In particular, the depth required for μ∗L 

> 1,N

to become ε-close to Haar on GN may itself depend strongly on N . This dependence is essential for reconciling the DLA-based asymptotic picture with the depth-aware Krylov–Lie framework developed in the present work. We now make precise the dimension-theoretic observation underlying this reconciliation. Let Θ N,L ⊆ Rp(N,L ) denote the parameter space of a depth-L variational ansatz on N qubits, where p(N, L ) is the number of independent real parameters. Let 

FN,L : Θ N,L −→ MN,L 

denote the smooth map sending parameters to the corresponding point in the reachable manifold MN,L of states or represented unitaries. Since MN,L is the image of a smooth map from a p(N, L )-dimensional manifold, one always has dim MN,L ≤ p(N, L ).

Hence, for any architecture whose parameter count satisfies p(N, L ) = poly( N, L ), the reach-able manifold has at most polynomial dimension whenever L = poly( N ). 110 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

This elementary geometric fact has a substantial consequence for the interpretation of barren plateau results. In either of the dimension-matched or dimension-reduced Krylov-Lie regimes of Chapter 4, one chooses a compact Krylov-Lie group KN,L together with a comparison map ΦN,L : MN,L −→ KN,L 

such that dim KN,L ≤ dim MN,L and Φ N,L has full rank almost everywhere. Under these hypotheses, the pushforward of the sampling measure on MN,L is absolutely continuous with respect to Haar measure on KN,L , so that the Radon-Nikodym density required in Theorem 5.1.4 exists and the weighted variance formula applies for the reduced loss with error factorially small in the Krylov-Lie grade (Theorem 4.3.5). But in this same regime one necessarily has dim KN,L ≤ dim MN,L ≤ p(N, L ).

Therefore, if p(N, L ) is polynomial in N , then the depth-aware reference group on which our variance theory is built is likewise at most polynomial-dimensional. Thus, by Theorem 5.1.4, the fastest decay one can obtain in a circuit whose parameter count is polynomial in N

solely from Lie-algebraic, Haar-type sources is in fact polynomial decay, not exponential. Of course, these sectors may very well be regions where training is slower and which are undesirable for practical implementation, but they are not barren plateaus as traditionally defined (Definition 2.1.1). Unless the factorially small error in the Krylov-Lie grade of Theorem 4.3.5 is large enough relative to the magnitude of the variance of the reduced loss over the KLG to deviate away from the Krylov-Lie predictions and into a BP—something that is highly unlikely to occur at even modest depths provided that the cardinality of the generator set is not sizeable relative to the depth—we will not have a dimension-induced Lie-algebraic BP at polynomial depth. This observation shows that one must distinguish two genuinely different regimes. First, there is the asymptotic DLA-Haar regime . Here, one fixes N , lets L → ∞ , and uses Kawada-Itˆ o to conclude convergence of the channel ensemble to the Haar measure on the full compact dynamical Lie group GN . When the Lie algebra has large simple components, the corresponding Haar variance may be exponentially small in N , as in the Lie-algebraic barren plateau theory. Second, there is the finite-depth, dimension-aware regime . Here one studies a fixed depth scaling L = L(N ), typically polynomial in N , and models the actual reachable ensemble through a dimension-matched Krylov-Lie group KN,L . In this setting, the group dimension is controlled by the parameter count, and hence cannot itself account for an exponential suppression arising solely from the size of the full DLA. Put differently, for polynomial-111 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

depth, polynomial-parameter ans¨ atze, one cannot faithfully regard the circuit as already exploring an exponential-dimensional manifold simply because the DLA generated by the architecture is exponentially large. This does not imply that barren plateaus cannot occur at shallow depth. Rather, it clarifies that the mechanism responsible for such concentration need not be, and in general should not be interpreted as, the dimension of the full DLA alone. Indeed, shallow barren plateaus may still arise from the structure of the observable, the initial state, or the blockwise design properties of the ansatz. This is entirely consistent with the cost-function-dependent results of Cerezo et al. [11], where global observables can exhibit exponentially small gradient variance even at shallow depth, while local costs remain trainable up to significantly greater depths. The point is that such shallow-depth concentration is driven by the observable and state sectors being probed and by local design behavior on subsystems, not by a faithful exploration of the full DLA group by a polynomial-depth ansatz. The distinction may be summarized as follows. Convergence to Haar on the full DLA group is an L → ∞ statement for each fixed N . By contrast, the present Krylov–Lie theory controls the geometry and measure of the ensemble actually explored at finite depth. If 

L = L(N ) grows only polynomially, then the reachable manifold remains at most polynomial-dimensional whenever the parameterization does, and any dimension-matched Krylov-Lie model must reflect this fact. Consequently, the exponentially small Haar variance associated with a large DLA should be understood as an asymptotic limiting value, not as a uniform finite-depth prediction valid throughout the polynomial-depth regime. One should therefore resist the heuristic inference that the mere existence of an exponen-tially large dynamical Lie algebra forces a barren plateau for every polynomial depth. Such a conclusion would require a depth bound ensuring sufficiently rapid convergence to Haar on GN uniformly in N , together with compatibility between the observable-state pair and the high-dimensional sectors of the adjoint representation that actually contribute to the variance. Absent such additional hypotheses, the finite-depth landscape is more faithfully described by the non-Haar weighted variance formula of Theorem 5.1.4, whose correction terms encode precisely which visible sectors remain unsuppressed. This perspective also elucidates that the failure of Lemma 6 in the argument of Ragone et al. is not a minor technicality but a structural issue. Without a valid mechanism forcing uni-form contraction of the nontrivial Fourier sectors, one cannot conclude that polynomial-depth circuit ensembles have already entered the full DLA-Haar regime. The Krylov-Lie frame-work isolates the finite-depth geometry and shows that deviations from Haar may persist in precisely those sectors that control trainability. Thus, while Haar-induced concentration on the full DLA may indeed emerge asymptotically under suitable ergodic hypotheses, the prac-112 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

tically relevant shallow-depth regime must be analyzed through the depth-aware geometry of the reachable manifold rather than through the dimension of the ambient DLA alone. 

Remark 6.1.1 . The preceding discussion should be interpreted as a statement about the measure-faithful regime of the present theory. If one instead chooses to embed the reachable manifold into a larger canonical Lie group whose dimension exceeds that of the manifold, or even more simply when we do not have a pushforward who rank is full almost everywhere (frequently the case for pathological sampling measures), then the pushforward measure generally has singular components with respect to Haar and the Radon-Nikodym formalism of Section 5.1 no longer applies directly. Such enlarged ambient models, as well as more general ones with singular components, may still be heuristically useful, but they describe a different regime from the one treated rigorously in this thesis. 113 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

## CHAPTER 7 DISCUSSION OF LIMITATIONS AND POSSIBLE EXTENSIONS 

The central contribution of this thesis has been the introduction of Krylov–Lie structures as depth-aware approximators for the reachable manifolds of variational quantum algorithms. By replacing the usual appeal to asymptotic Haar-randomness with a family of finite-depth, seed-dependent Lie-theoretic models, the preceding chapters developed a framework that is both more geometric and more sensitive to the actual circuit structure than existing ap-proaches based purely on dynamical Lie algebras or approximate t-design heuristics. In particular, the thesis established that represented Krylov–Lie groups provide canonical com-pact reference spaces carrying Haar measures, derived seed-stratification and genericity re-sults for the associated Krylov–Lie subspaces and algebras, proved approximation results for the reachable manifold on compact subsets (especially of the full-rank locus), and then used these structures to obtain weighted moment and variance formulas for non-Haar loss landscapes on the resulting compact groups. These results suggest that finite-depth geomet-ric structure, rather than asymptotic randomness alone, should play a central role in any realistic theory of trainability for shallow or intermediate-depth variational circuits. At the same time, the present theory is still incomplete. Several of the strongest results obtained here are existence, regularity, or approximation statements, and they therefore raise natural questions about constructive algorithms, sharper structural classifications, and extensions to broader physical settings. In particular, while the Lie-theoretic framework developed in this thesis is well adapted to noiseless unitary dynamics, it is not yet sufficient for a full treatment of noise, dissipative evolution, or optimization procedures that interact nontrivially with the geometry of the ansatz. The purpose of this chapter is therefore to summarize the principal limitations of the current framework and to highlight the most important directions in which it should be extended. 

## 7.1 The Need for Jordan Structure 

One of the clearest limitations of the present theory is that it is fundamentally Lie-theoretic. This is natural for unitary variational circuits, since their infinitesimal structure is gov-erned by commutators and the resulting reachable symmetries are encoded by Lie algebras 114 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

and compact Lie groups. However, once one attempts to study open-system effects, noise channels, or more general dissipative quantum dynamics, the Lie bracket alone is no longer sufficient to capture the relevant operator structure. The basic reason is that the Lindbladian generator of a quantum Markov semigroup naturally contains both commutator and anticommutator contributions. The Hamiltonian part of the evolution is Lie-theoretic, but the dissipative part is built from products of the form 

LαρL † 

> α

and {L†

> α

Lα, ρ },

so any attempt to construct a genuinely structure-preserving finite-depth approximation to noisy variational dynamics must accommodate not only Lie brackets but also Jordan-type products. Put differently, while the present Krylov–Lie framework is tailored to the anti-symmetric algebraic content of unitary evolution, a theory of noisy and nonunitary ansatzes appears to require a simultaneous treatment of the symmetric algebraic content as well. For this reason, one of the most important next steps is the development of a Krylov– Jordan or, more ambitiously, a unified Jordan–Lie framework. Such a theory would ideally retain the depth-awareness and seed-flexibility of the present construction while also encod-ing the symmetric products needed to analyze Lindbladian dynamics, effective noise models, and open-system trainability. If one hopes to understand whether the geometric compres-sion ideas developed here remain useful in realistic noisy devices, then one must identify the correct finite-dimensional algebraic object that simultaneously sees coherent control and dissipative drift. Additionally, noisy and nonunitary dynamics may ultimately prove vital to demonstrating quantum advantage by granting faster algorithms in a manner akin to randomized numerical linear algebra, or to how stochastic gradient descent often improves convergence times by effectively incorporating Hessian information without direct computa-tions [41]. A related issue is that many observables relevant to trainability are not controlled solely by the Lie structure of the ansatz, even in the noiseless setting. The present moment and variance formulas show that compact represented Krylov–Lie groups carry the right Haar background for analyzing non-Haar sampling laws, but they do not yet furnish an exact finite-depth analogue of the more fully state-space-sensitive Jordan-algebraic machinery that appears in other parts of the landscape literature. In this sense, the present framework should be viewed as a strong geometric and measure-theoretic foundation, but not yet as the final algebraic language for all aspects of trainability. 115 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

## 7.2 Open Problems 

A first major open problem concerns the dimension theory of Krylov–Lie subspaces and Krylov–Lie algebras. Chapter 3 showed that the relevant seed loci admit determinantal stratifications and constructible decompositions, and that maximal dimension is generic on appropriate supports. However, these results do not yet answer the most practically im-portant dimension questions. How sparse are the attainable dimensions in a fixed ansatz? When dimension matching is possible, is it rare or abundant? Do the attainable dimensions typically fill long integer intervals, or do they occur in thin arithmetic or representation-theoretic patterns? More generally, to what extent can one predict in advance whether a given family of generators and a chosen commutator depth can realize a dimension-matched Krylov-Lie structure at all? These questions are not immaterial for VQA landscape theory. The feasibility of the entire approximation program depends strongly on whether dimension-matched Krylov-Lie groups are abundant enough to be found in practice. The present results show that, once a desired dimension is realized, one often obtains useful genericity statements on the corresponding seed support. What remains unclear is how difficult it is to reach that support in the first place. A full theory of attainable dimensions, including lower bounds, sparsity phenomena, and possible interval results, would therefore substantially strengthen the practical content of the approximation theorem. A second open problem is whether the canonical comparison map used in this thesis is in any meaningful sense optimal. The canonical map is attractive because it is natural, explicit, compatible with the compressed circuit data, and it satisfies the analytic Jacobian hypothesis needed for the approximation theorems proved earlier. Nevertheless, there is no obvious inherent reason that it must necessarily be the best possible map from the reachable manifold into a represented Krylov-Lie group. It may be that other choices of comparison map preserve more of the geometry, yield larger full-rank loci, improve injectivity properties, or reduce the ambient approximation error. Accordingly, one of the central conceptual questions for future work is whether one can find a better representation of the reachable manifold than the canonical map, or instead prove a genuine optimality theorem for the canonical construction under natural geometric or operator-theoretic criteria. A third direction, also of a more geometric flavor, concerns the possibility of reconstruct-ing the original reachable manifold and its statistics from Krylov–Lie structures themselves. In Chapter 4 we observed that, on suitable compact subsets of the full-rank locus, comparison maps into represented Krylov–Lie groups behave like submersions or local diffeomorphisms, and that the pushforward measure admits a well-controlled Radon–Nikodym density. This 116 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

suggests that one might be able to construct atlases of Krylov–Lie charts whose transition data encode the geometry and measure of the reachable manifold in a purely Krylov-theoretic language, or more broadly to view reachable manifolds as admitting a Lietic structure in the informal sense of Remark 4.2.4. Determining when such atlases exist, and to what extent they allow faithful reconstruction of manifold-level structure and statistics from Krylov mod-els alone, is a potentially far-reaching open problem. A fourth direction concerns the role of nonuniform sampling as well as the possibility of reweighting the loss landscape. The weighted expectation and variance formulas in Chap-ter 5 show that deviations from Haar are encoded by the centered Radon-Nikodym density and its visible representation-theoretic sectors. This strongly suggests that the sampling distribution itself can have a substantial effect on the observed trainability of a variational algorithm. In particular, it raises the possibility that one could deliberately reweight the effective landscape so as to downweight regions exhibiting barren plateau behavior and up-weight regions with more favorable variance structure. At present, however, it is not clear whether such a strategy can be made algorithmically meaningful without already knowing detailed information about the landscape over which one is trying to optimize. Determining whether there exist principled, a priori reweighting schemes capable of mitigating barren plateaus is therefore an important open problem. The theory of importance sampling will likely prove relevant here. A fifth issue is interpretive rather than purely technical: the geometric meaning of sub-mersions in the Krylov-Lie approximation theory remains only partially understood from the perspective of the original algorithm. In the present framework, a lower-dimensional measure-faithful Krylov-Lie approximation naturally leads to a comparison map that is generically a submersion rather than a local diffeomorphism. This suggests that there are fiber directions in the reachable manifold that are invisible to the effective compact Lie geometry. One possible interpretation is that these directions correspond to geometric or algorithmic redundancy, in the sense that distinct parameter-space motions may induce equivalent or nearly equivalent behavior at the level captured by the approximating group. If that interpretation is correct, then submersions may encode a useful notion of compress-ibility or overparameterization intrinsic to the ansatz. Further work is needed to determine whether these hidden fiber directions correlate with trainability, symmetry, gauge freedom, or optimization degeneracy in the original circuit family. A sixth open problem concerns the computational meaning of “good” Krylov-Lie ap-proximations. Since the present framework seeks to approximate reachable manifolds by lower-dimensional or otherwise structured compact Lie models, it is natural to ask whether the quality of such approximations correlates with classical simulability. Roughly speaking, if 117 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

a variational circuit admits a highly accurate approximation by a small or highly structured represented Krylov-Lie group, then one might expect the effective degrees of freedom of the circuit to be limited in a way that makes certain observables, moments, or optimization tra-jectories easier to simulate classically. Conversely, the failure of low-dimensional Krylov–Lie approximations might signal genuinely hard many-body behavior. At present this relation-ship is speculative, but it is sufficiently natural that it deserves systematic investigation, especially in families of ans¨ atze where both classical simulation heuristics and Krylov–Lie constructions can be analyzed explicitly. Finally, a more practical but equally important direction is the development of algorithms for finding good seeds and certifying good approximators. The theoretical results of this thesis show that genericity statements are available once one works on the correct support, and that optimal seeds (in the sense of the supremum of the deviation of representatives of a unitary in the reachable manifold in the Hilbert-Schmidt norm) exist after restricting to compact unit-norm seed domains (Corollary 3.4.8, Theorem 4.2.1). However, an existence theorem is not yet a practical search procedure. Future work should therefore address the algorithmic side of the theory: how to efficiently construct seeds that pass finite full-rank tests, how to estimate uniform approximation error without exhaustive computation, how to detect promising dimensions and depths, and how to couple these tasks to ansatz design (in particular, assessing how optimal the initial state is as a seed). The present theory provides a strong first step toward a depth-aware geometric theory of variational quantum algorithms, but it also leaves a large and mathematically interesting research program behind. Extending the framework from Lie structure to Jordan-Lie struc-ture, clarifying the attainable dimensions of Krylov-Lie objects, characterizing the optimality of comparison maps, understanding reweighting strategies for trainability, interpreting the geometric meaning of submersions, and relating approximation quality to classical simula-bility are all natural next questions. If these directions can be developed successfully, then Krylov-based approaches may eventually furnish a broader replacement for purely Haar-centric theories of variational quantum dynamics. 118 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

## BIBLIOGRAPHY 

[1] J. Allcock, M. Santha, P. Yuan, and S. Zhang , On the dynamical Lie algebras of quantum approximate optimization algorithms , 2026. [2] E. R. Anschuetz , A unified theory of quantum neural network loss landscapes , 2025. [3] A. C. Antoulas , Approximation of Large-Scale Dynamical Systems , SIAM, Philadel-phia, 2005. [4] D. Applebaum , Probability on Compact Lie Groups , vol. 70 of Probability Theory and Stochastic Modelling, Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2014. [5] L. N. Argabright , A note on invariant integrals on locally compact semigroups , Pro-ceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 17 (1966), pp. 377–382. [6] M. C. Beltrametti, E. Carletti, D. Gallarati, and G. M. Bragadin , Lec-tures on Curves, Surfaces and Projective Varieties , EMS Textbooks in Mathematics, European Mathematical Society, Z¨ urich, 2009. [7] J. Bochnak, M. Coste, and M.-F. Roy , Real Algebraic Geometry , Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1998. [8] L. T. Brady and S. Hadfield , Iterative quantum algorithms for maximum indepen-dent set: A tale of low-depth quantum algorithms , 2023. [9] T. Br¨ ocker and T. Tom Dieck , Representations of Compact Lie Groups , vol. 98 of Graduate Texts in Mathematics, Springer, New York, 1985. [10] M. Cerezo, A. Arrasmith, R. Babbush, S. C. Benjamin, S. Endo, K. Fujii, J. R. McClean, K. Mitarai, X. Yuan, L. Cincio, and P. J. Coles , Variational quantum algorithms , Nature Reviews Physics, 3 (2021), p. 625–644. [11] M. Cerezo, A. Sone, T. Volkoff, L. Cincio, and P. J. Coles , Cost function dependent barren plateaus in shallow parametrized quantum circuits , Nature Communi-cations, 12 (2021), p. 1791. [12] I. Chavel , Riemannian Geometry: A Modern Introduction , Cambridge University Press, 2 ed., 2006. [13] H. Copp, C. Li, A. Margeta-Cacace, and A. Qiao , Dynamical Lie algebras can-not describe shallow QAOA: Cragged terrains, barren plateaus, and empirical hardness models . Manuscript in preparation, 2026. [14] D. S. Dummit and R. M. Foote , Abstract Algebra , John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 3rd ed., 2004. 119 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

[15] E. B. Dynkin , The Baker–Campbell–Hausdorff formula , Mathematics Surveys and Monographs, (1950). [16] L. C. Evans and R. F. Gariepy , Measure Theory and Fine Properties of Functions ,Chapman and Hall/CRC, revised ed., 2015. [17] G. B. Folland , A Course in Abstract Harmonic Analysis , Studies in Advanced Math-ematics, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1995. [18] , Real Analysis: Modern Techniques and Their Applications , Pure and Applied Mathematics, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2nd ed., 1999. [19] E. Fontana, D. Herman, S. Chakrabarti, N. Kumar, R. Yalovetzky, J. Heredge, S. H. Sureshbabu, and M. Pistoia , Characterizing barren plateaus in quantum ans¨ atze with the adjoint representation , Nature Communications, 15 (2024). [20] ˇZ. Grad , Fundamentals of Lie categories , Journal of Noncommutative Geometry, 19 (2024), p. 211–248. [21] E. E. Granirer , On the invariant mean on topological semigroups and on topological groups , Pacific Journal of Mathematics, 15 (1965), pp. 107–140. [22] M. H. Gutknecht and T. Schmelzer , The block grade of a block Krylov space ,Linear Algebra and its Applications, 430 (2009), pp. 174–185. [23] J. Haferkamp , Random quantum circuits are approximate unitary t-designs in depth 

o nt 5+ o(1) , Quantum, 6 (2022), p. 795. [24] B. C. Hall , Lie Groups, Lie Algebras, and Representations: An Elementary Introduc-tion , Graduate Texts in Mathematics, Springer, Cham, 2nd ed., 2015. [25] J. Harris , Algebraic Geometry: A First Course , vol. 133 of Graduate Texts in Math-ematics, Springer, New York, 1992. [26] Z. Holmes, K. Sharma, M. Cerezo, and P. J. Coles , Connecting ansatz express-ibility to gradient magnitudes and barren plateaus , PRX Quantum, 3 (2022). [27] Y. Kawada and K. Itˆ o, On the probability distribution on a compact group. I , Pro-ceedings of the Physico-Mathematical Society of Japan. 3rd Series, 22 (1940), pp. 977– 998. [28] A. Kirillov, Jr. , Introduction to Lie Groups and Lie Algebras , Cambridge University Press, 2008. [29] M. Larocca, S. Thanasilp, S. Wang, K. Sharma, J. Biamonte, P. J. Coles, L. Cincio, J. R. McClean, Z. Holmes, and M. Cerezo , Barren plateaus in variational quantum computing , Nature Reviews Physics, 7 (2025), p. 174–189. [30] J. D. Lawson , Polar and Ol’shanskii decompositions. , Journal f¨ ur die reine und ange-wandte Mathematik, 448 (1994), pp. 191–219. 120 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

[31] J. M. Lee , Introduction to Smooth Manifolds , vol. 218 of Graduate Texts in Mathe-matics, Springer, New York, 2nd ed., 2013. [32] H. Mustafayev , A note on the Kawada–Itˆ o theorem , Statistics & Probability Letters, 181 (2022), p. 109261. [33] A. Naor , Concentration of Measure , 2008. Lecture notes, Courant Institute of Math-ematical Sciences, Fall 2008. Scribed by Lingjiong Zhu. [34] C. P. O’Meara , A Lie Theoretic Framework for Controlling Open Quantum Systems ,PhD thesis, Technische Universit¨ at M¨ unchen, 2014. [35] C.-Y. Park and N. Killoran , Hamiltonian variational ansatz without barren plateaus , Quantum, 8 (2024), p. 1239. [36] V. M. Petrogradsky , On Witt’s formula and invariants for free Lie superalgebras ,in Formal Power Series and Algebraic Combinatorics, Springer, 2000, pp. 543–551. [37] M. Ragone, B. N. Bakalov, F. Sauvage, A. F. Kemper, C. Ortiz Marrero, M. Larocca, and M. Cerezo , A Lie algebraic theory of barren plateaus for deep parameterized quantum circuits , Nature Communications, 15 (2024), p. 7172. [38] Y. Saad , Iterative Methods for Sparse Linear Systems , SIAM, Philadelphia, 2nd ed., 2003. [39] F. Sottile , Real algebraic geometry for geometric constraints , 2016. [40] K. Stromberg , Probabilities on a compact group , Transactions of the American Math-ematical Society, 94 (1960), pp. 295–309. [41] Z. Xie, I. Sato, and M. Sugiyama , A diffusion theory for deep learning dynamics: Stochastic gradient descent exponentially favors flat minima , 2021. [42] H.-K. Zhang, S. Liu, and S.-X. Zhang , Absence of barren plateaus in finite local-depth circuits with long-range entanglement , Physical Review Letters, 132 (2024). 121 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

## APPENDIX A CENTRAL-CHARACTER OBSTRUCTIONS TO UNIT EIGENVALUES IN CYCLE-GRAPH QAOA 

In this section we show that cycle-graph QAOA on MaxCut presents a natural obstruction to the usual strict-overlap argument used to deduce a bound of the form |λ| < 1 from mere non-invariance. The key point is that the dynamical Lie algebra for Cn has a nontrivial center, and the induced conjugation action of the corresponding central torus on operator space contains genuine one-dimensional character sectors. Throughout, let 

g := gCn ⊆ su (2 n), X := i

> n−1

X

> j=0

Xj , ZZ := i

> n−1

X

> j=0

Zj Zj+1 ,

where indices are understood modulo n. By the cycle-graph QAOA Lie-algebra classification, one has the reductive decomposition 

g = c ⊕ g1 ⊕ · · · ⊕ gn−1, gk ∼= su (2) , dim c = 2 ,

and the center is explicitly 

c = span R{c1, c 2}.

For odd n,

c1 = −X +

> (n−1) /2

X

> t=1

 ZX 2t−1Z + Y X 2t−1Y , c2 = Xn−1 +

> (n−3) /2

X

> t=0

 ZX 2tZ + Y X 2tY ,

whereas for even n,

c1 = Xn−1 − X +

> (n−2) /2

X

> t=1

 ZX 2t−1Z + Y X 2t−1Y , c2 =

> (n−2) /2

X

> t=0

 ZX 2tZ + Y X 2tY .

See [1]. 

Lemma A.0.1 (Joint weight decomposition of the central action) . There exists an orthog-

122 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

onal decomposition 

H = M

> λ∈Λ

Hλ

into simultaneous eigenspaces of c1 and c2 such that, for every λ = ( λ1, λ 2) ∈ Λ,

cr|Hλ = iλ r IHλ , r = 1 , 2.

Proof. Since c1, c 2 ∈ su (2 n) are skew-Hermitian and commute, the Hermitian operators −ic 1

and −ic 2 commute and are therefore simultaneously unitarily diagonalizable. The joint eigenspace decomposition of −ic 1 and −ic 2 yields the stated decomposition for c1, c 2.

Remark A.0.2 . Since c̸ = 0, the set of joint weights Λ is nonempty. Moreover, because c1 and 

c2 are nonzero traceless operators, at least one of them is non-scalar, so there exist distinct joint weights whenever the center acts nontrivially on H.Let 

T := exp( c) = {exp( θ1c1 + θ2c2) | (θ1, θ 2) ∈ R2}.

This is a compact Abelian subgroup of the represented dynamical Lie group generated by the center. 

Lemma A.0.3 (Characters from weight differences) . Fix joint weights λ, μ ∈ Λ, and let 

Aλμ ∈ Hom( Hμ, Hλ) ⊆ End( H).

Then for every (θ1, θ 2) ∈ R2,

exp( θ1c1 + θ2c2) Aλμ exp( −θ1c1 − θ2c2) = e i[( λ1−μ1)θ1+( λ2−μ2)θ2] Aλμ .

Equivalently, the conjugation representation of T on Hom( Hμ, Hλ) is the one-dimensional character 

χλ−μ(θ1, θ 2) := exp  i[( λ1 − μ1)θ1 + ( λ2 − μ2)θ2].

Proof. Let v ∈ H μ. Since Aλμ v ∈ H λ, Lemma A.0.1 gives (θ1c1 + θ2c2)Aλμ v = i(λ1θ1 + λ2θ2)Aλμ v, 

whereas 

Aλμ (θ1c1 + θ2c2)v = i(μ1θ1 + μ2θ2)Aλμ v. 

Hence [( θ1c1 + θ2c2), A λμ ] = i[( λ1 − μ1)θ1 + ( λ2 − μ2)θ2]Aλμ .

123 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Since the commutator acts by a scalar on Aλμ , exponentiating yields the claim. 

Corollary A.0.4 (Failure of strict overlap) . Assume λ̸ = μ and Aλμ ̸ = 0 . Then Aλμ is not 

T -invariant, but for every (θ1, θ 2) ∈ R2 one has 

⟨Aλμ , exp( θ1c1 + θ2c2) Aλμ exp( −θ1c1 − θ2c2)⟩HS = ∥Aλμ ∥2 

> HS

.

In particular, non-invariance alone does not imply the existence of a group element whose Hilbert–Schmidt overlap with Aλμ is strictly smaller in modulus than ∥Aλμ ∥2 

> HS

.Proof. By Lemma A.0.3, exp( θ1c1 + θ2c2) Aλμ exp( −θ1c1 − θ2c2) = χλ−μ(θ1, θ 2)Aλμ ,

with |χλ−μ(θ1, θ 2)| = 1. Therefore 

|⟨ Aλμ , χ λ−μ(θ1, θ 2)Aλμ ⟩HS | = |χλ−μ(θ1, θ 2)| ∥ Aλμ ∥2 

> HS

= ∥Aλμ ∥2 

> HS

.

Since λ̸ = μ, the character is nontrivial, so Aλμ is not T -invariant. The preceding corollary shows that the usual strict overlap argument cannot be justified solely from the statement that an operator lies outside the invariant subspace. In the presence of a nontrivial central torus, one must additionally control the Fourier coefficients of the sampling measure against the characters arising from the weight differences. We now identify the central components of the two standard cycle-QAOA generators. 

Lemma A.0.5 (Central projections of the QAOA generators) . With respect to the orthogonal decomposition 

g = c ⊕ [g, g],

the central components of X and ZZ are 

Xc = − 1

nc1, (ZZ )c = 1

nc2.

Proof. The cycle-graph orbit-sums form an orthogonal basis of g [1], and the central basis vectors c1, c 2 are sums of exactly n such orbit-sums with coefficients ±1; hence 

∥c1∥2 

> HS

= ∥c2∥2 

> HS

= n22n.

Moreover, by inspection of the explicit formulas for c1, c 2:124 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

• the coefficient of X in c1 is −1, and X does not appear in c2;

• the coefficient of ZZ in c2 is +1, and ZZ does not appear in c1.Therefore 

⟨X, c 1⟩HS = −n2n, ⟨X, c 2⟩HS = 0 ,

and 

⟨ZZ, c 1⟩HS = 0 , ⟨ZZ, c 2⟩HS = n2n.

Since c1, c 2 are orthogonal, the orthogonal projection formulas give 

Xc = ⟨X, c 1⟩HS 

∥c1∥2

> HS

c1 = − 1

nc1, (ZZ )c = ⟨ZZ, c 2⟩HS 

∥c2∥2

> HS

c2 = 1

nc2.

Proposition A.0.6 (Central character of a single QAOA layer) . Let 

U (β, γ ) := eβX eγZZ .

Then its central factor is 

Uc(β, γ ) = exp 



−βn c1 + γnc2



.

Consequently, for every Aλμ ∈ Hom( Hμ, Hλ),

Uc(β, γ ) Aλμ Uc(β, γ )† = e iϕ λ,μ (β,γ )Aλμ ,

where 

ϕλ,μ (β, γ ) = −λ1 − μ1

n β + λ2 − μ2

n γ. 

Thus the induced character on this sector is 

χλ−μ(β, γ ) = exp 



i



−λ1 − μ1

n β + λ2 − μ2

n γ

 

.

Proof. Write 

X = Xc + Xss , ZZ = ( ZZ )c + ( ZZ )ss ,

with Xc, (ZZ )c ∈ c and Xss , (ZZ )ss ∈ [g, g]. Because g = c ⊕ [g, g] is a direct sum of ideals, all central elements commute with all semisimple elements. Hence 

eβX = eβX c eβX ss , eγZZ = eγ(ZZ )c eγ(ZZ )ss ,

125 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

and the central factor of U (β, γ ) is 

eβX c eγ(ZZ )c = exp( βX c + γ(ZZ )c) .

Applying Lemma A.0.5 yields 

Uc(β, γ ) = exp 



−βn c1 + γnc2



.

The formula for the induced action on Aλμ now follows from Lemma A.0.3. 

Corollary A.0.7 (Sampling-measure Fourier coefficient) . Let ν be any probability mea-sure on the parameter space of one-layer cycle-QAOA. Then on the weight-transfer sector 

Hom( Hμ, Hλ), the averaged central action is multiplication by the Fourier coefficient 

bν(λ − μ) := 

Z

χλ−μ(β, γ ) dν (β, γ ).

Hence a strict contraction on this sector requires a uniform bound 

bν(λ − μ) < 1

for every nonzero weight difference λ − μ that occurs. Proof. This is immediate from Proposition A.0.6 by averaging the scalar character action over ν.

Remark A.0.8 . Corollary A.0.4 should be interpreted as an obstruction to a proof strategy, not as a standalone claim that the full moment operator of cycle-QAOA must have eigenvalue 1. The semisimple factor Ln−1 

> k=1

gk ∼= Ln−1 

> k=1

su (2) may still produce contraction on the same operator sector. What the argument proves is that no strict spectral inequality statement can, in general, be deduced from non-invariance alone once a nontrivial central torus is present as in this case certain choices of sampling measure can allow for an eigenvalue of 1. We shall next demonstrate a concrete instance of this being the case. 

Proposition A.0.9 (Kernel-curve counterexample for all moments) . Let EL denote the depth-L cycle-graph QAOA ensemble with parameters (β, γ) and let M(t) 

> EL

be the correspond-ing t-th moment operator acting on End( H⊗t) via 

M(t) 

> EL

(X) := 

Z

> EL

U (β, γ)⊗t X (U (β, γ)⊗t)† dν L(β, γ), X ∈ End( H⊗t),

126 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

where U (β, γ) is the DLG representation of the circuit unitary. Assume there exists a nonzero DLA-visible weight difference λ − μ and a corresponding visible subspace Hλμ ⊂ Hom( Hμ, Hλ) such that the restriction of the DLG representation to 

Hλμ is given by a central character 

U (β, γ) Hλμ 

= χλ−μ(β, γ) IHλμ ,

with χλ−μ the nontrivial central character on the (λ, μ )-weight transfer sector (as defined in Appendix A). Assume further that there exists a nonconstant smooth curve on the space of all parameters ΘL

c : I → ΘL, t 7 → (β(t), γ(t)) ,

defined on a nontrivial open interval I ⊂ R, such that 

χλ−μ

 c(t) = 1 for all t ∈ I. 

Let q ∈ L1(I) with q ≥ 0 and R 

> I

q(t) dt = 1 , and define a probability measure νL on ΘL,and therefore on EL, by the pushforward: 

νL(E) := 

Z

> c−1(E)

q(t) dt, E ⊂ ΘL Borel .

Then: 1. νL is absolutely continuous with respect to one-dimensional Lebesgue measure on the parameter curve c(I).2. For every integer t ≥ 1, the t-th moment operator M(t) 

> EL

acts as the identity on 

End( H⊗tλμ ):

M(t) 

> EL

(Aλμ ) = Aλμ for all Aλμ ∈ End( H⊗tλμ ).

Equivalently, 

M(t)  

> ELEnd( H⊗tλμ )

= id End( H⊗tλμ ).

In particular, for every t ≥ 1 there is an eigenvalue 1 in this DLA-visible tensor sector, so there is no contraction there despite the parameter distribution having continuous density along I.Proof. (1) By construction, the parameter law on I is q(t) dt , which is absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue measure dt on I. The pushforward νL = c∗(q(t) dt ) is therefore 127 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

absolutely continuous with respect to the one-dimensional Hausdorff (Lebesgue) measure on the image curve c(I) ⊂ E L.(2) Fix an integer t ≥ 1 and an operator Aλμ ∈ Hom( Hμ, Hλ) supported on H⊗tλμ , i.e. X

acts nontrivially only on that tensor factor. By the central-character assumption, for each parameter pair ( β, γ) we have 

U (β, γ) Hλμ 

= χλ−μ(β, γ) IHλμ ,

hence on the t-fold tensor power 

U (β, γ)⊗t

> H⊗tλμ

= χλ−μ(β, γ)t IH⊗tλμ 

.

Along the curve c(t), the kernel condition χλ−μ(c(s)) ≡ 1 for all s ∈ I implies 

U  c(s)⊗t

> H⊗tλμ

= χλ−μ

 c(s)t IH⊗tλμ 

= 1 t IH⊗tλμ 

= IH⊗tλμ 

for all s ∈ I. 

Thus for any such Aλμ and any s ∈ I,

U  c(s)⊗t Aλμ (U  c(s)⊗t)† = Aλμ .

By definition of M(t) 

> EL

and of the pushforward measure νL, we have 

M(t) 

> EL

(Aλμ ) = 

Z

> ΘL

U (β, γ)⊗t Aλμ 

 U (β, γ)⊗t† dν L(β, γ)=

Z

> I

U  c(s)⊗t Aλμ 

 U (c(s)) ⊗t† q(s) ds. 

Since the integrand is identically Aλμ for all s ∈ I, this reduces to 

M(t) 

> EL

(Aλμ ) = 

Z

> I

Aλμ q(s) ds =

 Z

> I

q(s) ds 



Aλμ = Aλμ .

Therefore M(t)  

> ELEnd( H⊗tλμ )

= id, proving (2). 

Example A.0.10 (Explicit cosine–sine kernel curve for all moments) . In the setting of the preceding proposition, starting with the single-layer cycle graph QAOA on Max Cut, take any ( λ, μ )-weight transfer sector where the central character has the schematic form 

χλ−μ(β, γ ) = exp 



i a β + b γ 

,

for some nonzero integers a, b determined by the DLA-visible weights (cf. Appendix A). 128 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Consider the special case a = b̸ = 0. Set 

α := 2πk a , fix k ∈ Z,

and define a smooth curve c : I → ΘL by 

c(t) =  β(t), γ (t) :=  α cos 2 t, α sin 2 t, t ∈ I, 

where I ⊂ R is any nontrivial open interval on which cos t and sin t are not both constant. For every t ∈ I we have 

a β (t) + a γ (t) = a α   cos 2 t + sin 2 t

= a α 

= a 2πk a

= 2 πk. 

Hence the phase in the central character is constant: 

χλ−μ

 c(t) = exp  i(a β (t) + a γ (t))  = exp(2 πik ) = 1 for all t ∈ I. 

Now fix any q ∈ L1(I) with q ≥ 0 and R 

> I

q(t) dt = 1 (e.g. q(t) = 1 /len( I) if I is compact), and define νL on EL by the pushforward 

νL(E) := 

Z

> c−1(E)

q(t) dt, E ⊂ ΘL Borel .

By the preceding proposition, νL is absolutely continuous with respect to one-dimensional Lebesgue measure on c(I), and for every integer t ≥ 1 and every Aλμ ∈ End( H⊗tλμ ) one has 

M(t) 

> EL

(Aλμ ) = Aλμ .

Thus this explicit cosine–sine curve gives a parameter law with continuous density on a nontrivial interval for which all t-th moment operators have eigenvalue 1 on the DLA-visible tensor sector H⊗tλμ . This construction, at some notational cost, can be straightforwardly extended to arbitrary layers. 129 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

## APPENDIX B OBSERVABLE QUOTIENT FORMALISM AND AUXILIARY PROOFS 

We collect here some structural facts about the observable algebra A and the observable group Gobs used in the main text. All notation is as in the body of the chapter. 

B.0.1 A is already an algebra 

The first lemma justifies calling A an “algebra”: it shows that we do not need to close under products or conjugation by hand; those operations are already present at the level of matrix coefficients. 

Lemma B.0.1 (A is a unital ∗-algebra) . For all integers t, s ≥ 0,

Ft · F s ⊆ F t+s and Ft = Ft.

Consequently, A = span C

S 

> t≥0

Ft is a unital ∗-subalgebra of C(G): it contains the constants and is closed under products and complex conjugation. Proof. Let f1 ∈ F t and f2 ∈ F s, say 

f1(g) = V1, ρ (t)(g)W1 , f2(g) = V2, ρ (s)(g)W2

for some V1, W 1 ∈ H t and V2, W 2 ∈ H s.Then, for every g ∈ G,

f1(g) f2(g) = V1, ρ (t)(g)W1 V2, ρ (s)(g)W2

= V1 ⊗ V2,  ρ(t) ⊗ ρ(s)(g) ( W1 ⊗ W2) .

Let Σt,s : Ht ⊗ H s −→ H t+s

be the unitary that permutes tensor factors by first collecting the t + s unbarred factors and then the t + s barred factors. By construction of the balanced tensor powers, Σ t,s intertwines 

ρ(t) ⊗ ρ(s) with ρ(t+s): both act by ρ(g) on each unbarred tensor factor and by ρ(g) on each 130 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

barred factor. Therefore 

f1(g)f2(g) = V1 ⊗ V2,  ρ(t) ⊗ ρ(s)(g) ( W1 ⊗ W2)

= Σt,s (V1 ⊗ V2), ρ (t+s)(g) Σ t,s (W1 ⊗ W2)

∈ F t+s.

This proves Ft · F s ⊆ F t+s.For complex conjugation, write 

f (g) = ⟨V, ρ (t)(g)W ⟩ (V, W ∈ H t).

In the fixed product basis we have 

ρ(t) = ρ ⊗t ⊗ ρ⊗t.

Let 

τ : H⊗t ⊗ H ⊗t −→ H ⊗t ⊗ H ⊗t

be the tensor-swap unitary that exchanges the two blocks. By construction, τ intertwines 

ρ(t) with ρ(t).Thus, for all g ∈ G,

f (g) = V , ρ (t)(g) W

= τ V , ρ (t)(g) τ W 

∈ F t.

Hence Ft = Ft.Finally, by definition F0 consists of the constant functions (matrix coefficients of the trivial representation), so 1 ∈ A .The span of S 

> t≥0

Ft is closed under products by the first part and bilinearity, and closed under conjugation by the second part, so A is a unital ∗-subalgebra of C(G). 

B.0.2 Observable Stone–Weierstrass and Peter–Weyl 

The next lemma formalizes the idea that the observable algebra A is, after pushing forward to the observable quotient Gobs , as large as one could reasonably hope: it becomes a dense 

∗-subalgebra of C(Gobs ), and its balanced tensor powers see every irreducible representation of Gobs .131 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Lemma B.0.2 (Observable Stone–Weierstrass and observable Peter–Weyl) . For every f ∈ A 

there is a unique ef ∈ C(Gobs ) with 

f = ef ◦ Φ,

and the resulting map f 7 → ef is a unital ∗-algebra isomorphism of A onto 

eA := span C

n

x 7 → V, eρ(t)(x)W t ≥ 0, V, W ∈ H t

o

⊆ C(Gobs ).

Moreover: (a) eA is uniformly dense in C(Gobs ).(b) Every irreducible representation of Gobs is unitarily equivalent to a subrepresentation of eρ(t) for some t ≥ 1. Equivalently, an irreducible representation π of G occurs in some ρ(t) if and only if π is trivial on Z = ker Φ .(c) Every f ∈ A is constant on cosets of Z. In particular, if Z̸ = {e}, then A is not uniformly dense in C(G), and its uniform closure is the proper subalgebra 

{f ∈ C(G) | f (gz ) = f (g) ∀g ∈ G, z ∈ Z} ∼= C(Gobs ).

Proof. Every generator of A has the form 

f (g) = V, ρ (t)(g)W (t ≥ 0, V, W ∈ H t).

By Lemma 6.0.3(b) the balanced representation ρ(t) factors through Φ, that is, 

ρ(t) = eρ(t) ◦ Φfor a unique eρ(t) : Gobs → U (Ht). Thus 

f (g) = V, eρ(t)(Φ( g)) W = ef (Φ( g)) ,

where we set 

ef (x) := V, eρ(t)(x)W , x ∈ Gobs .

This constructs, for each generator f ∈ A , a corresponding ef ∈ eA with f = ef ◦ Φ. The map extends by linearity to all of A. Surjectivity of Φ : G → Gobs implies that ef is uniquely determined by f , and that the assignment 

A −→ eA, f 7 −→ ef

132 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

is an injective unital ∗-algebra homomorphism whose image is exactly eA. It is also an isometry for the uniform norms, since 

∥f ∥∞ = sup 

> g∈G

|f (g)| = sup 

> x∈Gobs

| ef (x)| = ∥ ef ∥∞.

(a) Uniform density. 

By Lemma B.0.1, A is a unital ∗-algebra, so its image eA is a unital ∗-subalgebra of 

C(Gobs ). It separates points: if x1, x 2 ∈ Gobs with x1̸ = x2, then some matrix entry of the unitary 

x ∈ Gobs ⊆ U (H ⊗ H )takes different values on x1 and x2. But those matrix entries are precisely the coefficients of 

eρ(1) , which lie in eA.Since Gobs is a compact Hausdorff space, the Stone–Weierstrass theorem [17, Thm. 4.45] implies that eA is uniformly dense in C(Gobs ). (b) Irreducibles of Gobs occur in the balanced powers. 

Assume towards contradiction that there exists an irreducible representation σ : Gobs →

U (W ) that is not equivalent to a subrepresentation of any eρ(t). Decompose each eρ(t) into irreducibles, and use the Schur orthogonality relations [17, Thm. 5.8] on Gobs . Every matrix coefficient of σ is orthogonal in L2(Gobs , μ Gobs ) to every matrix coefficient of every subrepre-sentation of eρ(t), hence to every element of eA.By part (a), eA is uniformly dense in C(Gobs ), and thus dense in L2(Gobs , μ Gobs ). Therefore every matrix coefficient of σ must vanish identically, which contradicts ⟨v, σ (e)v⟩ = ∥v∥2̸ = 0 for any nonzero v ∈ W . Thus every irreducible representation of Gobs appears in some eρ(t).For the equivalent restatement on G, note first that every ρ(t) is trivial on Z = ker Φ by Lemma 6.0.3(a), so any irreducible π occurring in some ρ(t) must be Z-trivial. Conversely, let π be an irreducible representation of G that is trivial on Z. Then π

descends to an irreducible representation of G/Z ∼= Gobs . By the first part, this descendant occurs in some eρ(t), and hence π occurs in the pullback 

ρ(t) = eρ(t) ◦ Φ.

This is the balanced analogue of the classical fact that tensor powers ρ⊗m ⊗ ρ⊗n of a faithful representation ρ contain every irreducible representation of the underlying compact group; see, for instance, [9, Ch. 3]. 133 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

(c) Coset-constancy and failure of density on G when Z̸ = {e}.

For any f ∈ A , we have f = ef ◦ Φ. If z ∈ Z, then Φ( gz ) = Φ( g) for all g ∈ G, so 

f (gz ) = ef (Φ( gz )) = ef (Φ( g)) = f (g).

Thus f is constant on every coset gZ .If Z̸ = {e}, choose z ∈ Z \ { e}. By Urysohn’s lemma there exists h ∈ C(G) with 

h(e) = 0 , h(z)̸ = 0 .

Then for every f ∈ A ,

∥f − h∥∞ ≥ 12 |h(z) − h(e)| > 0,

since f (e) = f (z) by coset-constancy and h(e)̸ = h(z). Thus A is not dense in C(G) when 

Z̸ = {e}.Finally, the uniform closure of A consists exactly of those continuous functions on G that are constant on cosets of Z:

A = {f ∈ C(G) | f (gz ) = f (g) ∀g ∈ G, z ∈ Z}.

The quotient map G → G/Z ∼= Gobs identifies this algebra with C(Gobs ), in agreement with part (a). 

B.0.3 Unit-modulus eigenvalues of Fourier coefficients 

The next lemma is the key spectral mechanism used in the observable Kawada–Itˆ o theorem. It gives an “equality case” characterization: an eigenvalue of modulus one of a Fourier coefficient bν(σ) forces the measure to be supported inside a stabilizer coset, and under adaptedness and strict aperiodicity that can only occur in a one-dimensional character sector, and only with eigenvalue 1. 

Lemma B.0.3 (Unit-modulus eigenvalues of Fourier coefficients) . Let K be a compact group, 

ν a probability measure on K, and σ : K → U (V ) a continuous unitary representation on a finite-dimensional Hilbert space V . Write 

bν(σ) := 

Z

> K

σ(x) dν (x).

Then: (a) ∥bν(σ)∥∞ ≤ 1.

134 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

(b) If bν(σ)v = λv for some 0̸ = v ∈ V and λ ∈ C with |λ| = 1 , then 

σ(x)v = λv for every x ∈ supp ν. 

(c) If, in addition, ν is adapted (i.e. [supp ν] = K), then Cv is σ(K)-invariant, and the function χ : K → T defined by 

σ(x)v = χ(x)v

is a continuous character of K satisfying χ ≡ λ on supp ν.(d) If, in addition, ν is strictly aperiodic, then χ ≡ 1; in particular λ = 1 and v is σ(K)-invariant. Proof. (a) For any unit vector u ∈ V ,

∥bν(σ)u∥ =

Z

> K

σ(x)u dν (x)

≤

Z

> K

∥σ(x)u∥ dν (x)=

Z

> K

∥u∥ dν (x) = 1 ,

using unitarity of σ(x) and Jensen’s inequality. Taking the supremum over all unit vectors 

u gives ∥bν(σ)∥∞ ≤ 1. (b) Assume bν(σ)v = λv with |λ| = 1 and v̸ = 0. Define the continuous real-valued function 

φ(x) := Re v, ¯λ σ (x)v , x ∈ K. 

By Cauchy–Schwarz and unitarity, 

φ(x) ≤ ⟨v, ¯λσ (x)v⟩ ≤ ∥ v∥2 for all x ∈ K. 

On the other hand, 

Z

> K

φ(x) dν (x) = Re 

D

v, ¯λ

Z

> K

σ(x)v dν (x)

E

= Re v, ¯λ bν(σ)v

= Re v, ¯λλv 

= ∥v∥2.

135 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Thus Z

> K

(∥v∥2 − φ(x)) dν (x) = 0 with a continuous nonnegative integrand. Therefore φ(x) = ∥v∥2 for all x ∈ supp ν: if 

φ(x0) < ∥v∥2 at some x0 ∈ supp ν, then φ ≤ ∥ v∥2 − δ on an open neighborhood of x0 of positive ν-measure, contradicting the integral identity. Now fix x ∈ supp ν, and set 

u := ¯λ σ (x)v. 

Then ∥u∥ = ∥v∥ by unitarity, and Re ⟨v, u ⟩ = φ(x) = ∥v∥2 = ∥v∥ ∥ u∥.

By Cauchy–Schwarz, 

|⟨ v, u ⟩| ≤ ∥ v∥ ∥ u∥,

and equality together with Re ⟨v, u ⟩ = ∥v∥ ∥ u∥ forces ⟨v, u ⟩ = ∥v∥ ∥ u∥, so u is a positive scalar multiple of v. Since ∥u∥ = ∥v∥, we have u = v.Thus ¯λ σ (x)v = v, i.e. σ(x)v = λv 

for every x ∈ supp ν.(c) Define the subset 

Kv := {x ∈ K | σ(x)v ∈ Cv}.

This is a subgroup: if σ(x)v = αv and σ(y)v = βv with α, β ∈ T, then 

σ(xy )v = σ(x)( σ(y)v) = αβv, σ(x−1)v = ¯ αv. 

It is also closed, since 

x 7 −→ ∥ (I − PCv)σ(x)v∥

is continuous and Kv is its zero-set. By part (b), σ(x)v = λv for all x ∈ supp ν, so supp ν ⊆ Kv. Adaptedness gives 

K = [supp ν] ⊆ Kv,

and hence Kv = K. Thus every σ(x) preserves the line Cv, i.e. Cv is σ(K)-invariant. 136 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

Define χ : K → T by 

χ(x) := ⟨v, σ (x)v⟩∥v∥2 .

Then σ(x)v = χ(x)v, |χ(x)| = 1 by unitarity, χ(xy ) = χ(x)χ(y), and χ is continuous. By part (b), χ(x) = λ for all x ∈ supp ν, so χ ≡ λ on supp ν.(d) Assume ν is strictly aperiodic. Suppose χ from part (c) were nontrivial. Then 

N := ker χ

is a proper closed normal subgroup of K: normality follows because for any k ∈ K, the conjugate kN k −1 also lies in ker χ.The support of a probability measure on a compact space is nonempty, so choose x0 ∈

supp ν. For any x ∈ supp ν,

χ(x−10 x) = χ(x0) χ(x) = ¯λλ = 1 ,

so x−10 x ∈ N , and hence x ∈ x0N . Thus supp ν ⊆ x0N, 

contradicting strict aperiodicity. Therefore χ must be trivial, i.e. χ(x) = 1 for all x ∈ K. In particular λ = χ(x0) = 1, and 

σ(x)v = v for all x ∈ K. 

That is, v is a σ(K)-invariant vector. 

B.0.4 Proof of i.i.d. QAOA convergence to Haar 

Finally, we shall prove the claim of Remark 6.0.8. 

Proof. Let ρ be the probability law of ( β, γ ) on the periodic QAOA parameter torus T , and let 

U : T → G, U (β, γ ) = e−iβH M e−iγH C ,

so that μ1 := U∗ρ is the induced one-layer measure on G. Since ρ has full support on T , we have supp ρ = T . Using the definition of the pushforward measure, 

μ1(B) = ρ U −1(B) for Borel B ⊆ G, 

137 Texas Tech University, Anˇ zej Margeta-Cacace , June 2026 

it follows that U (T ) ⊆ supp μ1: indeed, if x ∈ T and O ⊆ G is open with U (x) ∈ O, then 

U −1(O) is an open neighborhood of x, hence ρ(U −1(O)) > 0, so μ1(O) > 0. In particular, for every allowed β, γ ,

e−iβH M = U (β, 0) ∈ supp μ1, e−iγH C = U (0 , γ ) ∈ supp μ1,

and also 

e = U (0 , 0) ∈ supp μ1.

Therefore the closed subgroup generated by supp μ1 contains both one-parameter subgroups 

{e−iβH M } and {e−iγH C },

and hence contains the closed subgroup generated by them. By definition, that closed subgroup is exactly G. Thus [supp μ1] = G, 

so μ1 is adapted. Now suppose toward a contradiction, that μ1 is not strictly aperiodic. Then there exists a proper closed normal subgroup N ◁ G and an element g ∈ G such that supp μ1 ⊆ gN. 

Since e ∈ supp μ1, we have e ∈ gN , so g−1 ∈ N . Hence gN = N [14, §3.1], and therefore supp μ1 ⊆ N. 

But then [supp μ1] ⊆ N̸ = G, 

contradicting adaptedness. Therefore no such g and N exist, and μ1 is strictly aperiodic. 138