Title: On causal inference with marked point process data

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.12977v1

Published Time: Wed, 15 Apr 2026 01:38:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 82

Markdown Content:
ON CAUSAL INFERENCE WITH MARKED POINT PROCESS DATA 

PЛҡ AL CHRISTIE RYALEN 1,2,, MATS JULIUS STENSRUD 3, AND KJETIL RГҳYSLAND 2

> 1

Research Support Services, Oslo University Hospital, Norway 

> 2

Department of Biostatistics, University of Oslo, Norway 

> 3

Department of Mathematics, ВҙEcole Polytechnique FВҙ edВҙ erale de Lausanne, Switzerland 

Email: p.c.ryalen@medisin.uio.no 

Abstract. We define dynamic treatment regimes and associated potential outcomes for data described by marked point processes (MPPs). These defi-nitions motivate MPP analogues of the commonly used consistency, exchange-ability, and positivity conditions that are sufficient for identifying effects in MPP data structures. The conditions are formulated based on martingale theory, which allows us to derive explicit identifying assumptions for data described by stochastic processes. The definitions and conditions align with well-established discrete-time results in important special cases. Thus, this work bridges the large literatures on survival (event history) analysis with counting processes in continuous time and causal inference with variables in discrete-time. After formulating a set of identification conditions, we derive and characterize marginal g-formulas. The g-formulas are generally different from those studied in related works, though they coincide in important spe-cial cases. We relate our findings to previous work on causal inference with (counting) processes, the classical survival literature, and the discrete-time causal inference literature. 

1. Introduction 

The literature on causal inference is vast. In fields like medicine and economics, causal frameworks are now routinely applied, also in longitudinal settings with (time-varying) treatment regimes [46, 37, 38, 40, 18, 34]. Many causal models can be represented graphically [32, 34], providing formal tools for reasoning about conditional independencies, which are important for identification. Broadly, these models require that random variables satisfy a particular ordering, thereby defining a discrete-time stochastic process. However, the foundational вҖҷdiscrete-timeвҖҷ causal inference literature does not immediately apply to data structures that are often considered in the classical statistical literature on (continuous time) processes. For example, there is a large literature on survival and event history analysis formulated with continuous-time counting processes, a special case of marked point processes (MPPs), which is commonly applied in similar fields [1, 2, 55, 11, 7]. Many works have attempted to unify these literatures, e.g., by articulating counting process analogues of the discrete-time conditions for identifying effects of time-varying treatment regimes. 

Date : April 15, 2026. 

> 1
> arXiv:2604.12977v1 [stat.ME] 14 Apr 2026

Gill and Robins [15], henceforth referred to as GR04, conjectured that a g-formula (aka g-computation formula) could be derived under analogues of these conditions in an MPP setting. However, after GR04 stated their conjectured conditions, the authors expressed uncertainty when attempting to prove the formula, writing that вҖқHow to proceed from here, is not so clear.вҖқ [15, p. 5]. To the best of our knowledge, the gap identified by GR04 has not since been rigor-ously addressed. As far as we are aware, analogues of the discrete-time identifying conditions of consistency, exchangeability, and positivity [18, 37, 38, 40], have not been established for MPP data. There are no proofs of identification results in the literature that validate a set of conditions as sufficient. 1 Because MPP analogues of these conditions have not been operationalized, theories for causal identification that connect these statistical literatures are lacking. In particular, it is unclear how 

g-formulas for MPP data can be derived. The gap between results in continuous and discrete time is unsatisfactory and inconvenient. It complicates the comparison of different approaches, and constrains the knowledge transfer across statistical disciplines. Discrete-time researchers seek-ing to compare their methods with classical survival analysis are forced to work across data structures that do not immediately align. This misalignment can lead to imprecision or errors in methodological comparisons. Moreover, in longitudinal studies where participants are tracked over time, the state of being under follow-up, i.e., not being censored, can be formalized as a time-varying exposure [37, 18]. Although the counting process methods were designed to tackle the problem of censoring, they are arguably ill-equipped to cover identification strategies of ef-fects of practical interest, because conditions for identifying effects of time-varying treatment regimes are lacking. Discrete-time data structures can be subsumed by MPP theory; adding certain restrictions to an MPPвҖҷs compensator gives discrete-time data structures as a spe-cial case. Conceptually, we would therefore expect that identifying conditions in the MPP theory reduce to canonical discrete conditions when the compensator is suitably constrained. This inclusion is also strict. In particular, the continuous-time theory contains a richer collection of optional times (aka stopping times), such as totally inaccessible optional times describing events that, informally, cannot be foreseen based on earlier recorded events. In practice, many event times may be of this type, e.g. the time of death or recurrence of a disease. Totally inaccessible times are also essential to articulate statistical estimands in the survival literature, as the existence of hazards and intensities relies on such times. Because any op-tional time can be uniquely decomposed into the minimum of an accessible time 

and a totally inaccessible time, the discrete-time theory excludes some structure of event times of interest. This exclusion is rarely discussed, and the potential impact of the exclusion is not well understood. On the other hand, the MPP theory is well suited for the statistical analysis of event times because it accommodates a rich collection of optional times. This paper introduces theory inspired by existing work on potential outcome variables [46, 37, 38, 40], designed for MPP data structures. We give a compre-hensive description of deterministic time-varying treatment regimes in the point 

> 1Although there are conjectured identification conditions, and applications based on these conjectures, see Section 2 for a comparison of this work with previous work on continuous-time causal inference.
> 2

process setting, and formally define the associated potential outcomes. Building on this foundation, we develop MPP analogues of existing established identifying conditions [18] that are sufficient to identify associated effects. We illustrate our theory with several examples to highlight its practical consequences. To establish identification formulas, we develop a new identifying likelihood-ratio process derived directly from the intervention rules. Using this likelihood-ratio process, we derive and characterize identification formulas, in particular the 

g-formula [37], whose discrete time analogues are foundational in causal inference. Our g-formula representations are new, as our identifying likelihood ratio process has not, to our knowledge, been emphasized in related causal inference works. To ensure backward compatibility, we demonstrate that our conditions reduce to existing discrete-time conditions [37, 40, 34] when compensator processes induce discrete-time data structures. When developing identification conditions and proving identification results in the MPP setting, we find that stochastic process concepts such as optional times, filtrations, and compensators (aka dual predictable projections) play central roles. As a result, some tools from stochastic processes, and specifically point processes, are required to make precise statements and to appropriately deal with measur-ability issues. For a comprehensive study of these concepts and results, we refer readers to, e.g., [22, 33, 5, 16]. For literature that focuses specifically on MPPs, we recommend [20, 26]. The article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we relate this work to existing work on continuous-time causal inference. In Section 3, we introduce basic nota-tion. In Section 4, we define interventions, introduce potential outcome processes, and describe our identification criteria. In Sections 5 and 6, we present our main identification result and then provide an explicit construction demonstrating that observed data, potential outcomes, and the identifying conditions (consistency and exchangeability) can be realized simultaneously on a single probability space. In Section 7 we express classes of identifying functionals, characterize the identifying likelihood-ratio process, and propose solutions to open unsolved problems posed by GR04. In Section 8, we relate our results to identifying conditions in the discrete-time literature. In Section 9, we extend the results to general MPP settings, before we consider estimation in Section 10. A discussion is found in Section 11. The appendices contain basic definitions, equivalent representations of MPPs central to articulate our results, proofs of main results, supporting lemmas, and calculations not found in the main text. An overview of the notation is given in the final part of the appendix. 2. Previous work on continuous-time causal inference 

Most of the work on causal inference concerns events in discrete time. An early contribution to continuous time causal inference is the work of Lok [27, 29, 28], who, e.g., developed structural nested models [39, 41] in continuous time. Work by RГёysland and colleagues introduced methods based on change of measures and GirsanovвҖҷs theorem [50, 51], with related contributions [47, 48] further developing these ideas. More recently, RГёysland, Ryalen, Nygaard, and Didelez [52] introduced graphical criteria to aid in identification for this theory. We will refer to these works collectively as RRND. 

> 3

However, these existing works consider structural models that are different from those we will consider. For example, structural nested models are designed with the motivation of imposing parametric restrictions on the effect of a sequence of treatments on, e.g., the conditional mean of an outcome. In contrast, we focus on the identification of marginal estimands with minimal parametric assumptions. RRND study a structural model based on changing treatment counting process intensities anchored in the more abstract invariance principle of вҖқcausal validity,вҖқ which does not generally correspond to specifying explicit interventions. We, in contrast, specify explicit interventions that can be implemented by decision-makers based on patientsвҖҷ history. Others, such as [6, 58], assume an underlying dynamical system, for example, a stochastic differential equation (SDE), where the path space of complex (e.g. infinite variation) processes is functionally constrained by a system that is indexed by a low-dimensional parameter. Such approaches may be too restrictive, e.g., in medical applications, where we often do not know how data are generated. Our work, in contrast, concerns causal identification of explicit interventions on specific outcomes of interest while operating under minimal assumptions regarding how the data is generated other than that it satisfies an MPP data structure. Others have targeted estimands that are similar ours, including Rytgaard, Gerds, and van der Laan [49], hereafter referred to as RGvdL. They developed targeted minimum loss-based estimation tailored to a specific point process setting. We discuss the relationship between our work and RGvdL in Remark 1 and compare our examples with theirs in Section 9.3. Another related contribution is YingвҖҷs recent framework for identifying causal effects in functional longitudinal data settings [64, 63]. Ying aims to impose minimal restrictions on the path space of the stochastic processes involved, and he obtains general results that can be applied in many different (functional) data settings. In contrast to both these related approaches, and inspired by [37, 34, 18], our work is centered around single-world exchangeability conditions. In particular, we aim to specify independence conditions for identification, whose logical implications, in principle, can be tested in ideal experiments. Other relevant counting process applications in the literature include [19, 23], which explore certain dynamic regimes in similar contexts to ours, focusing on CD4-based dynamic treatment regimes for HIV-infected adolescents and treatment duration policies where treatment can be discontinued at any point in time, respec-tively. These works specify identifying assumptions that resemble those conjectured by GR04. Similar exchangeability conditions have also been described in works on structural nested models, see e.g. [68, 28, 62, 35]. Our work complements existing studies that target вҖҷestimand-basedвҖҷ parameters, by detailing the identification ar-guments, thereby clarifying how identifying conditions can effectively be applied. Some relevant details and caveats are contained in Sections 4-7. In brief, our work offers the following contributions. We give definitions of dy-namic treatment regimes and the associated potential outcomes, establish MPP analogues of common identifying conditions, and derive and characterize mar-ginal g-formulas for MPP data. In particular, we prove and give precise mean-ing to GR04вҖҷs conjectured g-formula in the MPP setting, where we also address GR04вҖҷs concerns regarding the so-called validity of g-formulas, which has been an open problem in the literature. We bridge strands of the statistical literature 

> 4

by specifying the precise restrictions on compensators, identifying conditions, and data-generating laws in the MPP setting to align with those commonly studied in discrete-time theories. Furthermore, we develop identification results for the effects of interventions on a wide range of outcomes that include both variables and pro-cesses, rather than on a single outcome variable measured at the end of follow-up. Throughout the text, we relate our work and existing work on causal inference with (counting) processes, the classical survival and event history analysis literature, and the discrete causal inference literature. 

Remark 1 (RGvdLвҖҷs identification claims and the gap in the literature) . RGvdL develop results on estimation starting from postulated identification formulas. Their focus is on developing estimators; they assume that certain observed data function-als equal causal effects, based on existing identification results by Gill and Robins [14] (hereafter referred to as GR01, not to be confused with GR04). Specifically, RGvdL assert that вҖқthe вҖҷtraditionalвҖҷ causal assumptions as stated by Gill and Robins (2001) can be applied at the random timesвҖқ [49, p. 2476]. However, a formal argument supporting this claim is not provided by RGvdL or GR01. Furthermore, RGvdL do not address Gill and RobinsвҖҷ statement that extending the discrete-time identification theory to counting process data is an open problem. In GR01, Gill and Robins write: вҖқLok (2001) develops a counting process framework, within which she is able to formalize parts of the theory and prove many of the key results. It is an open problem to complete this project with a continuous time version of the g-computation formula and the theorems centered around it вҖқ [14, p. 1791] (emphasis added). In GR04, Gill and Robins reiterate: вҖқIt is an open problem to complete that project with a continuous time version of the 

g-computation formula and the theorems centered around it. ... Below we do not succeed in proving the formula, nor establishing the wished-for results which should follow from itвҖқ [15, p. 1-2]. As Gill and Robins further note, without a properly established g-formula, вҖқthe statistical methodology lacks motivationвҖқ [15, p. 1]. In Section 9.2, we examine some of RGvdLвҖҷs identification formulas, based on our derived results. In particular, we identify a decision-making narrative implicit in RGvdLвҖҷs examples. Based on substantive considerations, we propose an alternative decision-making narrative under which we develop our examples. Our approach aligns with causal inference works that ground assumptions in substantive stories [34, 37, 44, 65]. 3. Set-up and notation 

To simplify the presentation, we initially consider the special case of a d-dimensional multivariate counting process N = ( N 1, . . . , N d) representing recordings of ob-served data. This aligns with data structures that are commonly studied in survival and event history analysis [1, 2, 55, 11, 7]. After establishing the main results in this setting, the generalization to general MPP data, given in Section 9, follows without much effort. A given component N it counts the number of times an event of type i, such as hospitalization or death, has occurred from time zero until t. In particular, there is a treatment counting process N a on which we want to intervene. 

N is defined on a measurable space (О© , F). Throughout the paper, we focus on processes on a fixed time interval [0 , T ], and write F[0 ,T ] for the filtration generated by N , i.e. the natural filtration. 

> 5

3.1. Representations of point process trajectories. Point processes can be represented in various ways, and we will leverage these different representations throughout the paper. For instance, a d-dimensional counting process N = ( N 1, . . . , N d) can also be represented as 

вҖў A double sequence N = ( Tk, X k)kвүҘ1 of event times Tk вҲҲ [0 , T ] вҲӘ {вҲһ} and event types, or вҖҷmarksвҖҷ, Xk, where Tk < T k+1 and Xk вҲҲ I d := {1, . . . , d }

whenever Tk вүӨ T , and Tk = Tk+1 and Xk = вҲҮ whenever Tk = вҲһ, where 

вҲҮ is the вҖҷirrelevant markвҖҷ signifying вҖҷno eventвҖҷ. 

вҖў A random counting measure N (dt Г—dx ) = P 

> kвүҘ1

Оҙ(Tk ,X k )(dt Г—dx ) on [0 , T ]Г—Id, where Оҙ(t,x ) denotes the Dirac measure at ( t, x ). These different representations are related via N it = N ((0 , t ] Г— { i}) = P 

> kвүҘ1

I(Tk вүӨ

t, X k = i). A more precise description of the relationship between the representa-tions can be found in [26, 20] or Appendix A.3. For each Пү вҲҲ О©, N (Пү) is a point process trajectory. Following [26], we reserve the notation ПҶ for a generic point process trajectory and move freely between its representations as needed. When treating ПҶ as a double sequence of ordered event times tk and associated marks xk, we write ПҶ = ( tk, x k)kвүҘ1. Alternatively, when treating ПҶ as a d-dimensional counting process trajectory, we write ПҶt =(ПҶ1 

> t

, . . . , ПҶ dt ). When treating ПҶ as a counting measure, we write ПҶ(dt Г— dx ), where these representations are related via ПҶit = ПҶ((0 , t ] Г— { i}) = P 

> kвүҘ1

I(tk вүӨ t, x k = i). We let N dT denote the set of all such trajectories ПҶ (represented as double se-quences) on [0 , T ] with mark set Id. Equipped with the projection Пғ-algebra HdT ,(N dT , HdT ) becomes a measurable space, often called the canonical space of point process realizations (see Appendix A.3, or [26, 20]). Under the above identifications, the observed data process N takes values in N dT ,and the treatment process N a on which we intervene takes values in N 1 

> T

. This will be referenced when defining interventions in Section 4.1. 3.2. Compensators. There exists a non-decreasing predictable cadlag process Оӣ = (Оӣ 1, . . . , Оӣd) that satisfies 

EP [N iП„ ] = EP [Оӣ iП„ ] for each F[0 ,T ]-optional time П„ and each i, (1) see, e.g., [20, 26, 4]. This is called the compensator of N , and it is uniquely specified (up to indistinguishability) by (1). The role of compensators in our MPP theory is similar to the role of conditional distributions in discrete causal inference theories [32, 37, 8]; they parametrize statistical models [20, 26, 21]. The compensator de-pends on both the probability measure and the filtration. Because we will consider different probability measures and filtrations, we will emphasize this dependence; for example, Оӣ is the ( P, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N .Similarly to the point process trajectories, we will exploit equivalences of process and random measure representations of the compensator Оӣ [26, 20], and move freely between these representations as needed. For technical reasons we assume throughout that 

Assumption 1. N is without explosions, i.e. P   P di=1 N iT = вҲһ = 0. Assumption 1 says that an infinite number of events (or jumps) occur with probability zero in the interval [0 , T ]. In particular, Assumption 1 ensures that 

M := N вҲ’ Оӣ is a local martingale with respect to P and F[0 ,T ] [2]. 

> 6

4. Interventions, Potential outcome processes, and identifying conditions 

4.1. Interventions. To derive the consequences of interventions we must be clear about what these interventions вҖ” also called actions, treatment strategies, plans, policies, protocols, or regimes [18, 32, 8] вҖ” are. In particular, our results are sensitive to the kind of information the interventions depend upon. To motivate our intervention definition, we begin with an example to illustrate what this dependence looks like in practice. Consider a patient visiting a medical clinic for a consultation with a physician. Before deciding on treatment, the physician first reviews test results and consults guidelines. Thus, the clinical information recorded at assessment is available before the time treatment is subsequently administered. Finally, just before acting, doctors have, in principle, access to the timing of their action (they could simply check what time it is). In this simple illustration, the decision-relevant information at each time t (clin-ical measurements and action timing) is available to the doctor strictly prior to t.Assuming that all data for a given patient is described by an MPP trajectory ПҶ,we write ПҶ|tвҲ’ for the restriction of ПҶ to the interval [0 , t ), i.e., the history up to right before t. In this example, any hypothetical intervention specifying assigned treatment for the given patient can, at each time t, depend only on ПҶ|tвҲ’.The conclusion from our motivating example invites a more general question: can any real-world decision, whether made by a clinician, an automated system, or any other agent, depend on truly temporally simultaneous events? We believe the answer to this question is вҖҷnoвҖҷ. Any plausible decision-making scenario in-volves a delay between information receipt and action; during that interval, the decision-maker has access to the information that will guide the action, including (in principle) the timing of the action itself. Because this property appears funda-mental to how decisions are actually made, we encode it directly into our definition of an intervention. To formally state our definition, we must introduce some notation. Following [26], we say that a function f on [0 , T ] Г— N dT is predictable if f (t, ПҶ ) = f (t, ПҶ |tвҲ’)for each t and point process trajectory ПҶ вҲҲ N dT . This definition of predictability coincides with the conventional meaning of predictability when understood with respect to the filtration generated by the identity on ( N dT , HdT ) [26, Theorem 2.2.6, 2.2.8]. 

Definition 1 (Intervention) . We say that a map na : N dT вҶ’ N 1 

> T

is an intervention ,or a predictable intervention , if the mapping ( t, ПҶ ) 7 вҶ’ nat (ПҶ) := na(ПҶ)t is predictable, i.e., if nat (ПҶ) = nat (ПҶ|tвҲ’). That is, an intervention na is a predictable one-dimensional counting process on the canonical space: for each ПҶ вҲҲ N dT , nat (ПҶ) is the value at time t of the one-dimensional counting process trajectory na(ПҶ) вҲҲ N 1 

> T

(recall the notational con-ventions in Section 3.1). Since the observed treatment process N a takes values in 

N 1 

> T

, Definition 1 ensures that na produces feasible treatment trajectories. Thus, 

na formalizes a hypothetical decision-making process, where at any time t, the as-signed treatment may depend adaptively on the history of events strictly prior to 

t.

> 7

The perspective on interventions encoded in Definition 1 is not new: foundational causal inference works define dynamic treatment regimes as functions of variables strictly earlier in the observed data ordering [18, 34, 37, 32, 9], an ordering that is typically understood, implicitly and explicitly, to be temporal. These definitions align with our observation that real-world interventions вҖ” actions that can actually be carried out вҖ” depend only on information available strictly before the action. Consequently, our definition captures the interventions that can be specified as part of an ideal experiment or protocol. Definition 1 focuses on deterministic interventions on a one-dimensional counting process component. The extension to interventions on multiple components in the general MPP setting is given in Section 9. Deterministic interventions are often of main interest in practice; for example, medical doctors rarely give treatments to patients by flipping coins (or by drawing random numbers). The generalization to random treatment strategies is neverthe-less not difficult in principle if we include in our filtration a collection of вҖҷrandom-izersвҖҷ that can figure as input in na; see, e.g., [34, equation (57)] for an analogous definition in discrete time. In our examples (Sections 4.3 and 9), we formalize stories about how decisions are made in practice. The interventions described in these examples are captured by Definition 1. 4.2. Potential outcome processes. We introduce processes representing the out-comes that would have been realized if an intervention as in Section 4.1 had been carried out with perfect compliance. This takes the form of another d-dimensional counting process ЛңN , which plays a role similar to counterfactual variables, aka po-tential outcomes, in existing theories [46, 37, 40]. We will also consider the filtration ЛңF[0 ,T ] generated by ЛңN , which gives a formalization of the history that emerges when the intervention is imposed. Though not explicit in the notation, ЛңN is defined in terms of an intervention as given in Section 4.1. In contrast to N , the process ЛңN is not fully вҖҷobserved.вҖҷ A central part of this work is to present conditions that ensure that marginal expectations of potential outcomes of interest are identified from the information in FT . The outcomes we consider, with associated identifying conditions, are detailed in Sections 4.4вҖ“4.5. We characterize ЛңN via its compensator. Because the distribution of an MPP is determined by the compensator, [26, Section 8], the upcoming definition also deter-mines ЛңN вҖҷs law, P ( ЛңN вҲҲ В· ). Consequently, P -expectations of measurable functionals of ЛңN are unambiguously defined. Our definition makes use of the unique вҖқcanonical compensator,вҖқ Оұ = ( Оұ1, . . . , Оұd), of N with respect to P and the natural filtration F[0 ,T ]. Оұ has the property that when evaluated in the observed trajectories, it defines a compensator of the observed process, i.e. Оӣj = Оұj (N ) P -a.s. (2) for each j. See Appendix A.3.1 or [26, Theorem 4.2.2] for a precise result on canonical compensators. To ensure a well-defined canonical compensator (see [26, Theorem 4.2.2 and Section 4.3]) suitable for constructing potential outcomes, we impose the following 

> 8

regularity conditions: 

 X

> jвҲҲI d\{ a}

dОұ jt (ПҶ) + dnat (ПҶ) I(ПҖвҖІвҲһ(ПҶ) < t ) = 0 ,(3) 

X

> jвҲҲI d\{ a}

вҲҶОұjt (ПҶ) + вҲҶ nat (ПҶ) вүӨ 1,(4) for each ПҶ вҲҲ N dT and t вҲҲ [0 , T ], where ПҖвҖІвҲһ(ПҶ) := inf {s > 0| P 

> jвҲҲI d\{ a}

Оұjs(ПҶ) + 

nas (ПҶ) = вҲһ} and вҲҶ Zt := Zt вҲ’ ZtвҲ’ for a cadlag process Z. The condition (3) can be made to hold by redefining na and the Оұj вҖҷs if necessary. (4) is a substantive condi-tion which depends on the intervention under study. The condition is specific to the MPP setting, and it is connected to the assumption of strict monotonicity of MPP jump times. The condition may be violated if na imposes treatment times which have a positive probability of coinciding with event times of the other processes. The conditions (3)-(4) hold for many of the interventions considered in this article, such as the treatment-prevention intervention in Example 1 later in this section. To simplify the presentation, we will assume that (3)-(4) hold throughout, recognizing that these conditions must be verified on a case-by-case basis in practice. 

Definition 2 (Potential outcome process) . Fix a version of the canonical compen-sator Оұ = ( Оұ1, . . . , Оұ d) in (2) and an intervention na satisfying (3)-(4). We say that ЛңN is a potential outcome process with respect to the intervention na if (a) na( ЛңN ) defines a ( P, ЛңF[0 ,T ])-compensator of ЛңN a,(b) Оұj ( ЛңN ) defines a ( P, ЛңF[0 ,T ])-compensator of ЛңN j for jМё = a.Definition 2 (a) is equivalent to ЛңN a = na( ЛңN ) P -a.s. (5) see Appendix D.2 for details. Thus, Definition 2 states that ЛңN a is fixed to na( ЛңN ), while the canonical compensators of all processes other than the treatment process are the same as for the observed processes. In particular, Оұj ( ЛңN ) then coincides with 

Оұj  ( ЛңN 1, . . . , ЛңN aвҲ’1, na( ЛңN ), ЛңN a+1 , . . . , ЛңN d).(6) Definition 2 and (5)-(6) are analogous to definitions of potential outcomes starting from structural equations [32, 34]. In particular, Definition 2 becomes equivalent to common definitions of data-generating laws found in the discrete-time literature [37, 34], if we impose the restrictions on compensators that induce discrete-time data structures, see Proposition 3 in Section 8. To limit the scope of this work we have not included the natural value process in Definition 2, that is, the treatments a subject would take under the regime if we had not (adaptively) implemented the regime [43, 66, 34, 53]. We do therefore not study interventions that depend on the natural value process, nor do we identify effects on the natural value process. Such extensions will be considered in future research. 4.3. Examples of interventions and associated potential outcome pro-cesses. The following examples illustrate interventions and their associated poten-tial outcome processes. We give further examples in Section 9. 

> 9

Example 1. [Atomic intervention] Consider an intervention that fixes each trajec-tory to some ЛҶ ПҶ вҲҲ N 1 

> T

, i.e. where the map ПҶ 7 вҶ’ na(ПҶ) = ЛҶ ПҶ is constant. An example of such a ЛҶ ПҶ is the trajectory that is identically zero on [0 , T ], corresponding to the intervention which prevents treatment. Because constant processes are predictable, we know from (5) that ЛңN a = na( ЛңN ) = ЛҶ ПҶ P -a.s. Furthermore, (6) states that the compensator of ЛңN j coincides with 

Оұj  ( ЛңN 1, . . . , ЛңN aвҲ’1, ЛҶПҶ, ЛңN a+1 , . . . , ЛңN d),

i.e. with the aвҖҷth component substituted with the intervened trajectory ЛҶ ПҶ. Interven-tions that fix treatment trajectories are often called вҖқdeterministic static regimesвҖқ [18], or вҖқactionsвҖқ [32, 8]. 

Example 2. [Starting treatment after a covariate spike] Consider a setting where individuals are followed starting from diagnosis (at t = 0), with the possibility of joining a treatment program at a later point in time. Such treatment decisions are often influenced by changes in certain covariates. Suppose there is a covariate that can вҖҷspikeвҖҷ during the study period, and let ПҶl in ПҶ = ( ПҶ1, . . . , ПҶ d) denote the component that counts the occurrences of these covariate spikes. The question of when to start a treatment program is often of clinical interest. Consider, for example, an investigator who is interested in initiating the program a time increment Оҙ > 0 after a covariate spike is reported. This action corresponds to 

nat (ПҶ) = ПҶltвҲ’Оҙ ,

using the convention Zt := 0 for t < 0 when Z is a function or process on [0 , T ]. The delay Оҙ gives clinicians time to review information about the spike and decide whether to initiate treatment. Here we assume Оҙ is deterministic for simplicity, although our results allow for random delays. 2

Because Оҙ > 0, the intervention is predictable, i.e. nat (ПҶ) = nat (ПҶ|tвҲ’), and from (5) it follows that ЛңN at = nat ( ЛңN ) = ЛңN ltвҲ’Оҙ P -a.s. ,

which can further be substituted into the compensator of ЛңN j as in (6). This na

is an example of a вҖқdeterministic dynamic regimeвҖқ [18], or a вҖқconditional actionвҖқ [32]. 

Example 3. [Treatment assignment after review period] Consider a doctor who makes a binary treatment decision (treat or not treat) when a patient visits. More specifically, after a patient arrives at a clinic, the doctor reviews available infor-mation (e.g., medical history), and then makes a treatment decision. This review takes time, inevitably creating a delay between information gathering and treat-ment allocation. In the observed data, there is a short delay Оҙ > 0 between the time information is gathered and the treatment is allocated. As in Example 2, we take Оҙ to be deterministic for simplicity; the specific nature of the delay is not important for this story. The delay reflects both the processing time needed for clinical decisions 

> 2We briefly discuss random delays in Section 9.2.
> 10

and that the doctor is aware of the decision timing before acting, consistent with our discussion in Section 4.1. Suppose that the doctorвҖҷs decision may be informed by whether the patient ex-perienced a covariate spike in the previous week. Let ПҶl count covariate spikes, 

ПҶv count when information is gathered (assessment), and ПҶa count recorded treat-ments. The intervention вҖқadminister treatment if a covariate spike occurred in the previous weekвҖқ assigns treatment at t if a spike occurred in [ t вҲ’ 1, t ) (assuming time is measured in weeks). Formally, this intervention is 

nat (ПҶ) = 

Z t

> 0

I(ПҶlsвҲ’ вҲ’ ПҶlsвҲ’1 > 0) dПҶ v,Оҙ s ,(7) where the counting process trajectory ПҶv,Оҙ t := ПҶvtвҲ’Оҙ shifts the assessment times forward by Оҙ, so that treatment decisions occur Оҙ time units after the corresponding assessment. Because Оҙ > 0, the decision at time t depends only on information available strictly before t, making na predictable. By (5) we get that ЛңN at =

Z t

> 0

I( ЛңN lsвҲ’ вҲ’ ЛңN lsвҲ’1 > 0) d ЛңN v,Оҙ s P -a.s. ,

where ЛңN v,Оҙ s := ЛңN vsвҲ’Оҙ , and ЛңN a can then be substituted into the compensator of ЛңN j

as in (6). 4.4. Outcome functionals of interest, observed and potential outcomes of interest. We will identify estimands that are marginal expectations of specific functionals of ЛңN . We study functionals ЛҷY = { ЛҷYt}tвҲҲ[0 ,T ] which are optional stochas-tic processes on ( N dT , HdT ); that is, ЛҷY satisfies ЛҷYt(ПҶ) = ЛҷYt(ПҶ|t).

From ЛҷY we define the potential outcome of interest as ЛңY := ЛҷY ( ЛңN ),

while the associated observed outcome is 

Y := ЛҷY (N ).

In plain English, these definitions state that at any time t, the observed (or po-tential) outcome of interest is a functional of events occurring up to time t in the observed process N (or the potential outcome process ЛңN , respectively). An outcome functional ЛҷY as above can e.g. be a process with piecewise constant cadlag or caglad paths. A simple example is survival: ЛҷYt(ПҶ) = I(ПҶdt = 0) defines the survival indicator at each time t, where the d-component counts the occurrence of death. The corresponding observed and potential outcomes are Yt = I(N dt = 0) and ЛңYt = I( ЛңN dt = 0). Outcomes of interest that are random variables at specific time points, such as survival at the end of follow-up T , can easily be desribed by such a functional. 4.5. Identifying conditions. Having defined the outcomes of interest, we turn to the conditions under which expectations of such outcomes can be identified. The upcoming definition focuses on an irrelevance condition which ensures that a wide range of outcomes are identified. 

> 11

To formulate our identification conditions, consider the optional time 

П„ a := inf {s > 0|N asМё = nas (N )},(8) which plays a central role in this work; this is the first time the observed treatment process differs from the treatment assigned by the regime based on the observed trajectories. We define the process Na := I(П„ a вүӨ В· ), which counts whether П„ a has occurred up to a given point in time. Consider also Оӣa, the ( P, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of Na, and define Ma := Na вҲ’Оӣa, which is a martingale with respect to P and F[0 ,T ].Throughout we adopt the assumption 

P

 Z T

> 0

dОӣas

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

< вҲһ



= 1 . (Positivity) (9) We refer to (9) as positivity , as it is equivalent to positivity conditions described in the discrete-time literature [18] when compensators are restricted. Further de-tails on this connection are given in Section 8. In our work, (9) ensures that the upcoming key equations are well-defined. However, we will suppose additional in-tegrability conditions beyond (9) to establish identification formulas in our setting. These additional integrability conditions hold automatically in discrete-time set-tings provided that (9) holds, see Proposition 3 in Section 8. Under (9), the process 

Ka := вҲ’

Z В·

> 0

dMas

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

(10) is well-defined, and also a local martingale with respect to P and F[0 ,T ]. Conse-quently, the SDE 

W = 1 + 

Z В·

> 0

WsвҲ’dKas ,(11) i.e. the stochastic exponential (aka DolВҙ eans-Dade exponential) of Ka, is also well-defined, and admits a unique solution W = E(Ka) [33, II Theorem 37]. We require that W is a likelihood ratio process, i.e. that W is a nonnegative, mean one uniformly integrable martingale on [0 , T ]. The stochastic exponential provides the canonical method to generate likelihood ratio candidates and verifying integrability conditions; see, e.g., [5, 33, 22, 57, 56] and the references therein. In particular, it follows from the preceding construction that W is a nonnegative local martingale (see Lemma 7 in Appendix D for details). Thus, W is a valid likelihood ratio process provided that the integrability conditions in the following definition are met. 

Definition 3 (Identifying conditions) . For an intervention na and outcome func-tional ЛҷY (Section 4.4), the following conditions are said to be the identifying con-ditions for the potential outcome process ЛңY of interest: (i) Consistency: 

YtI(П„ a > t ) = ЛңYtI(П„ a > t ) P -a.s. for each t вҲҲ [0 , T ].(12) 

> 12

(ii) Exchangeability: 3

Оӣa is the compensator of Na with respect to both F[0 ,T ] and F ЛңY  

> [0 ,T ]

under P, 

(13) where F ЛңY  

> [0 ,T ]

:= {F t вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңY )}tвҲҲ[0 ,T ].(iii) Likelihood ratio regularity: 

EP [Wt] = 1 for each t вҲҲ [0 , T ].(14) The consistency condition (12) states that almost all trajectories of Y and ЛңY

coincide as long as the trajectories of na(N ) are equal to the trajectories of the observed treatment process N a, and is an extension of the discrete time consistency condition for time-varying treatment regimes. The condition connects observed outcomes with potential outcomes through the treatment actually received; the realizations coincide so long as an individualвҖҷs observed treatment aligns with the treatment regime of interest. The exchangeability condition (13) states informally that, for an individual who, in the observed data, has followed the regime up to any point in time, knowledge of their future potential outcome ЛңY does not offer any additional information to improve predictions about whether they will continue following the regime in the future. The condition is often violated when unmeasured covariates, not recorded in F[0 ,T ], are predictive of subsequent treatments and outcomes of interest; con-ceptually, this can be interpreted as unmeasured confounding. In the case of a sequentially randomized experiment with perfect compliance, we have that (13) holds by design for ЛңY = ЛңN . We discuss the testability of our type of exchangeabil-ity assumptions in Appendix D.5. The exchangeability condition (13) shares similarities with conditions previously described in the causal inference literature [68, 28, 62, 35, 15]. Yet, to our knowl-edge, and as explicitly highlighted in [14, p. 1791] and [15, p. 1], such conditions have not before been successfully adapted to derive a g-formula for MPP data. To establish the formula we develop the new likelihood ratio construction in (10)-(11), along with integrability conditions for valid measure changes which ensure that our 

g-formulas are well-behaved. Discrete-time theories express exchangeability as conditional independencies, which are symmetric. Symmetry is not generally defined for our exchangeability condition because ЛңY need not have compensators with respect to, nor even be adapted to, the filtrations F[0 ,T ] and {F t вҲЁ Пғ(Na)}tвҲҲ[0 ,T ]. Still, even if ЛңY has compensators with respect to both these filtrations, it does not follow from (13) that these compensators coincide. The condition (13) is also closely related to conditions found in the literature on missing data with stochastic processes [36, 54, 42]. A more detailed study of the connection between our conditions and those in the missing data literature will be addressed in subsequent work.                              

> 3A filtration FtвҲЁПғ( ЛңY)tвҲҲ[0 ,T ], which treats ЛңYas a random element that is realized at baseline is sometimes called the initial enlargement of F[0 ,T ]by the random element ЛңY. We could equivalently have phrased (13) in terms of the filtration FП„aвҲ§tвҲЁПғ( ЛңY)tвҲҲ[0 ,T ], where FП„aвҲ§tis the Пғ-algebra associated with the optional time П„aвҲ§t.
> 13

Since (9) is assumed to hold, the likelihood ratio regularity condition (14) is equivalent to stating that W defines a likelihood ratio process on [0 , T ] with respect to P and the filtration F[0 ,T ]. This is shown in Lemma 8 in Appendix C. 4 The same lemma shows that, under the exchangeability condition (13), W is also a likelihood ratio process with respect to the filtration F ЛңY 

> [0 ,T ]

, and in particular a martingale with respect to this filtration. This innocent-looking implication is the driving force behind our main identification result, Theorem 1 in Section 5. The process W has further representations with alternative interpretations. For instance, equations (24)-(25) in Section 7.4 represent W as a regime adherence indicator divided by a cumulative product of conditional (infinitesimal) regime ad-herence probabilities. These identities establish W as a continuous-time analogue of the вҖқunstabilized weightsвҖқ involved in discrete inverse probability weighting (IPW) identification formulas for time-varying treatment regimes [17, 18]. The representa-tions also highlight how IPW processes can be thought of as вҖқcensoring weightsвҖқ by choosing a suitable reparametrization. We discuss these aspects further in Section 7.4. Section 8 establishes a detailed connection between our conditions and conditions which are widely used in the discrete-time causal inference literature. We refer readers to [18] for a comprehensive and practically oriented discussion of these conditions. 4.6. Differences from identification conditions in related work. In contrast to likelihood ratios that have been posed in related work on causal inference with stochastic processes [48, 50, 51, 52, 49, 64, 63], we do not define W as a likelihood ratio between a specified вҖҷtargetвҖҷ distribution and the observational distribution, where the target distribution is obtained by replacing one component of the ob-servational distribution with an вҖҷinterventionalвҖҷ component. In particular, our def-inition of W does not reference a parametrization of the model, and interpreting 

W in terms of how the model is parametrized does not immediately seem helpful. Nonetheless, our results are derived from formal definitions of interventions and align with existing discrete-time work [37, 40, 18, 34], where g-formulas are derived under single world exchangeability conditions. The commonly used informal description of positivity, that there must be some subjects who follow the hypothetical intervention within all levels of the past, [18], aligns more naturally with the evaluability conditions (9) and (14). This connection is captured by the representation of W found in (24) in Proposition 2 in Section 7.4. In that same section, we further characterize W and provide a specific unique relationship between W and our exchangeability and consistency conditions. To distinguish between our work and related works it is helpful to introduce a new term for the distribution induced under the conditions in Definition 3. This distribution is integrally linked to our definitions of interventions and our identifying conditions. 

Definition 4 (g-formula distribution) . We call the probability measure 

dQ := WT dP       

> 4Given (9), (14) is equivalent to that Wis a martingale on [0 , T ]. Wis then automatically uniformly integrable, as shown in the proof of Lemma 8. For non-compact time domains the matter is more delicate; see e.g. [33, I 2].
> 14

on FT the g-formula distribution associated with a given intervention na under the conditions in Definition 3. 5. Main Identification Result 

Under the conditions in Definition 3, marginal expectations of a bounded 5 po-tential outcome process of interest ЛңYt, as described in Section 4.4, associated with a realization ЛңN that emerges under an intervention as in Definition 1, are identified. This is established in the following theorem. 

Theorem 1. Suppose that the conditions of Definition 3 are satisfied for a bounded outcome functional of interest (Section 4.4). Then, for each t вҲҲ [0 , T ], 

EP [ ЛңYt] = EP [WtYt].(15) 

Proof. Consistency implies via Lemma 7 v) (Appendix D) that 

EP [WtYt] = EP [Wt ЛңYt].

Moreover, Lemma 8 (Appendix D) gives that W is a uniformly integrable ( P, F ЛңY 

> [0 ,T ]

)-martingale under the conditions (9), (13), and (14) вҖ” i.e. under our positivity, exchangeability, and likelihood ratio regularity conditions. Since ЛңYt is bounded and evidently Пғ( ЛңY )-measurable, we get EP [Wt ЛңYt] = EP [W0 ЛңYt] by the martingale property. The desired result (15) follows since W0 = 1. в–Ў

The formula (15) is an example of an IPW formula [45], and it is an identification formula since W is F[0 ,T ]-adapted, making the right-hand side a functional of ob-served quantities. Our work focuses on marginal expectations of bounded potential outcome processes ЛңY , but the techniques in Theorem 1 can readily be used to de-rive identification results for many other quantities of interest, such as conditional effects given baseline covariates or distributional effects. While we focus on point processes in this paper, the conditions in Definition 3 and the associated proof strategy refer to concepts from the general theory of stochastic processes such as filtrations, optional times, and compensators. The ideas presented here apply more generally to a wide range of stochastic processes, including discrete time processes, and our presentation thus unifies identification results across vastly different data structures. Extending our work to other stochastic process settings would require definitions of potential outcomes for such settings, which is beyond the scope of this paper and will not be discussed further here. Other works have conjectured or claimed that a sequential exchangeability condi-tion вҖ” a sequence of conditional independence conditions, one condition connected to all or some of the jump times {Tk}kвүҘ1 of N вҖ” is sufficient to derive formulas analogous to (15) [15, 49]. These conjectured conditions, however, are not equiv-alent. The question of whether such conditions are valid is not just a theoretical puzzle, because investigators interested in testing exchangeability need to know if they are testing a sufficient condition. In Proposition 5 in Appendix D.7 we sketch an argument using a sequential condition that ensures (15) under the additional assumption that each Tk is predictable. The result may have limited practical value, since the assumption that the jump times of N are predictable with respect     

> 5Boundedness can be substituted with other context-specific integrability assumptions, and further relaxed by imposing more stringent integrability conditions on Wor Ma; see e.g. [26, Theorem 2.1.42].
> 15

to the observed filtration is very hard to justify in practical settings. We include the proposition and the connected lemmas because they may help other researchers derive g-formulas, or clarify relationships between different identification conditions in MPP settings. 6. A joint construction ensuring identifying conditions are satisfied 

Theorem 1 shows that if the consistency, exchangeability, and likelihood ratio regularity conditions in Definition 3 hold, then marginal means of potential out-comes of interest are identified. A concern when imposing identifying assumptions is whether they place hidden restrictions on the observed data law. This problem was examined in discrete time by GR01. While exchangeability conditions similar to ours have been described in the literature, the issue of whether such conditions impose hidden restrictions has not, to our knowledge, been addressed. The following proposition shows that, under a certain martingale orthogonality condition, we can construct, on a new probability space if necessary, observed and potential outcomes with the correct laws such that our consistency and exchange-ability conditions hold simultaneously. Specifically, if the intervention respects (3)-(4), and the canonical compensator Оұ = ( Оұ1, . . . , Оұ d) in (2) satisfies (16), then our identifying conditions impose no hidden restrictions on the observed data law. The result is generalized to multiple interventions in Theorem 3 in Section 9. 

Proposition 1 (Construction of observed and potential outcomes satisfying Def-inition 3) . Suppose that the canonical compensator Оұ = ( Оұ1, . . . , Оұ d) of N with respect to P and F[0 ,T ] satisfies the orthogonality condition 

X

> jвҲҲI d\{ a}

вҲҶОұat (ПҶ)вҲҶ Оұjt (ПҶ) = 0 (16) for each t вҲҲ [0 , T ] and ПҶ вҲҲ N dT , and that (3)-(4) holds. Then, there exists a probability space (О© вҖІ, FвҖІ, P вҖІ) supporting observed and potential outcomes N вҖІ and ЛңN вҖІ, both d-dimensional multivariate counting processes, such that (i) N вҖІ|tI(П„ вҖІa > t ) = ЛңN вҖІ|tI(П„ вҖІa > t ) for each t вҲҲ [0 , T ]. (ii) ОӣвҖІa is a compensator of NвҖІa = I(П„ вҖІa вүӨ В· ) with respect to both {F вҖІ 

> t

}t and 

{F вҖІ 

> t

вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңN вҖІ)}t under P вҖІ, where П„ вҖІa = inf {s > 0|N вҖІasМё = nas (N вҖІ)} (analogous to (8)), and {F вҖІ 

> t

}t is the filtration generated by N вҖІ.(iii) P вҖІ(N вҖІ вҲҲ В· ) = P (N вҲҲ В· ), and P вҖІ( ЛңN вҖІ вҲҲ В· ) = P ( ЛңN вҲҲ В· ). In particular, under these regularity conditions, there exists a probability space on which the consistency and exchangeability conditions in Definition 3 hold for any optional outcome functional ЛҷY , with Y = ЛҷY (N вҖІ) and ЛңY = ЛҷY ( ЛңN вҖІ). Thus, these conditions impose no hidden restrictions on the observed data law. The assumption (16) is closely related to the assumption that the observed treat-ment martingale is orthogonal to the other observed martingale components (see Appendix D.6). Analogous assumptions appear implicitly in related work, either through continuity assumptions on the observed data compensator [50, 51, 47, 52] or by the way the likelihood is specified [49]. Many existing statistical methods in survival analysis implicitly assume orthogonal martingales [2, 1, 55, 11, 7], but this literature generally does not discuss how the assumption might be wrong. We show an extreme example of violation of orthogonal martingales in Appendix D.6.1. 

> 16

If the consistency condition (12) holds, one might expect the stronger condition 

Y I (П„ a вүҘ В· ) = ЛңY I (П„ a вүҘ В· ) P -a.s. (17) to also hold. This strengthened condition, which will be explored further in subse-quent work, requires that the observed and potential outcomes of interest agree up to and including the regime deviation time. We show through an example in Appendix D.4 that the stronger consistency condition (17) can be incompatible with the exchangeability condition (13). The example violates the orthogonality condition (16). 7. Deriving the g-formula for marked point process data 

7.1. A foundation for g-formulas in MPP settings. It is well known that com-pensators characterize both MPP distributions and likelihood (ratios) [20, 26, 21]. Related work has expressed g-formulas where compensators and even MPP like-lihoods figure symbolically as вҖҷintegratorsвҖҷ [49, 15, 63], even though MPP distri-butions and likelihoods are very different objects. In particular, RGvdL present formulas it appears hard to connect with established theory on compensators and integration theory; see [49, Equation (8) and numerous subsequent expressions]. These connections are crucial for giving theoretical guarantees, but it is not imme-diately clear how to make them. We here give precise meaning to existing formulas by using that the compensator defines a kernel from the underlying measurable space to the product of the positive reals and the mark space. A benefit of making clear sense of the integral involved is the immediate conclusion that the g-formula does not depend on choices of the conditional laws involved in it; see Section 7.5 for details, and also GR01 and GR04. To express the g-formula we first give required results for its formulation in Lemmas 1 and 2, before we state the formula in Theorem 2. In the вҖқcanonical settingвҖқ where the underlying measurable space (О© , F) is the canonical space and N = Id , we obtain a particularly nice expression (see Definition 6 in Appendix A.3, or [26, Remark 2.2.5] for details on the canonical setting). In the case of a general abstract measurable space, the upcoming equation (19) takes a more complicated form which references the interplay between N , its compensator, and the canonical compensator. 6 7

Lemma 1 (MPP distribution (canonical setting)) . Consider, on the measurable space ( N p, Hp) of p-dimensional point process trajectories on R+, the point process 

N = Id (canonical setting). 8 Let ОІ be the compensator of N with respect to its natural filtration {H pt }t and P , and suppose that N is nonexplosive under P .Writing {Tn}nвүҘ1 for the ordered jump times of N , the distribution of N with           

> 6The resulting form is indicated in the proof of the lemma; see equation (125) and the sur-rounding text.
> 7In practical terms, adopting the convention in Lemma 1 amounts to identifying each subject
> Пүin a study with that individualвҖҷs point process realization ( Tk(Пү), X k(Пү)) k, where Tkis the kвҖҷth event time and Xkis the kвҖҷth event type, which is not a restrictive convention.
> 8See Definition 6 in Appendix A.3 or [26] for more details on the canonical setting.
> 17

respect to P when restricted to the optional time Пғ-algebra HpTn takes the form 

dF n(t1, x 1, . . . , t n, x n) = I(t1 < В· В· В· < t n) В· Z(0) (dt 1 Г— dx 1)

В· Z(1) (( tk, x k)k|t1 , dt 2 Г— dx 2)В·

. . . В· Z(nвҲ’1) (( tk, x k)k|tnвҲ’1 , dt n Г— dx n),

(18) where Z(0) is a probability measure on [0 , вҲһ) Г— I p, and for i вүҘ 1, Z(i) is a kernel from N pti (the space of trajectories restricted to [0 , t i]) to ( ti, вҲһ) Г— I p, where Ip =

{1, . . . , p } is the mark space of a p-dimensional multivariate counting process. The relationship between the terms in (18) and the compensator is in the canonical setting (19) 

Z(i)(( tk, x k)k|ti , dt Г— dx ) = P

> ti<u<t



1 вҲ’ ОІ(( tk, x k)k|ti , du Г— I p)



ОІ(( tk, x k)k|ti , dt Г— dx ),Z(0) (dt Г— dx ) = P

> 0<u<t



1 вҲ’ ОІ(( tk, x k)k|0, du Г— I p)



ОІ(( tk, x k)k|0, dt Г— dx ),

where P denotes the product-integral. 9 Moreover, for every integrable and W 

> tвүҘ0

Hpt -measurable random variable H, we have 

EP [H] = 

Z

> (R+Г—I p)N

H (tk, x k)k

dF вҲһ(t1, x 1, . . . ),(20) where N = {1, 2, 3, . . . }. Here, FвҲһ is the unique probability distribution on ( R+ Г—Ip)N which satisfies Fn = FвҲһ в—Ұ ПҖвҲ’1 

> n

for each n вҲҲ N, where ПҖn is the projection of the first n components of ( R+ Г— I p)N, and R+ is the non-negative real numbers. 7.2. The compensator under the g-formula distribution Q. To apply Lemma 1 to the g-formula distribution dQ = WT dP , we need the ( Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N . This compensator can be obtained via GirsanovвҖҷs theorem, a well-known result from stochastic analysis. In general, the Girsanov transform determined by Definition 4 shows a com-plicated relationship between the intervention and the derived distribution (see Lemma 12 in Appendix E). However, under our regularity condition (4) on the intervention, and under the sufficient existence condition (16) in Proposition 1, we obtain the much simpler form shown in Lemma 2. 

Lemma 2 (The ( Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensator) . Assume Definition 3 (iii) holds together with conditions (4) and (16). Then, (a) na(N ) is a ( Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N a,(b) Оӣ j is a ( Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N j for jМё = a.

Definition 5 (Invariance property (IP)) . Suppose that for a probability measure 

QвҲ— on FT with QвҲ— вүӘ P , there exists a non-decreasing, predictable process Оӣ a, вҲ—

such that (i) Оӣ a, вҲ— is a ( QвҲ—, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N a,

(ii) Оӣ j is a ( QвҲ—, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N j for each jМё = a. 

We then say that QвҲ— satisfies the invariance property (IP) with respect to Оӣ a, вҲ—.

> 9For details on product integration see e.g. [2], or [13] for an extensive survey.
> 18

Recall that Оӣ j is the ( P, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N j (see Section 3). Lemma 2 shows that, under our regularity conditions, Q satisfies the invariance property (IP) with respect to na(N ); that is, the treatment compensator is modified according to the intervention while the compensators of the non-treatment processes remain unchanged relative to P . The invariance property in Definition 5 appears in many existing works on causal inference with counting process data (see, e.g., [50] 10 for an early example, and many other works discussed in Section 2). In particular, related works term this invariance property вҖқcausal validityвҖқ [47, 48, 52]. In our work, (IP) is a consequence of our definitions and regularity conditions, not an assumption. Thus, Lemma 2 shows that g-formula distributions satisfy (IP), but distributions satisfying (IP) are not necessarily g-formula distributions: many distributions sat-isfying (IP) do not correspond to explicit interventions as in Definition 1. We elaborate on this distinction in Remark 2. 

Remark 2 (Distinguishing g-formula distributions from general distributions satis-fying (IP)) . The family of distributions QвҲ— satisfying (IP) with respect to some Оӣ a, вҲ—

is large: it is indexed by a class of non-decreasing and predictable processes Оӣ a, вҲ—

that need only satisfy mild regularity conditions [26, Corollary 10.1.6 and Theorem 10.2.1]. In Appendix D.1, we characterize this class through their likelihood-ratio pro-cesses W вҲ— 

> t

= dQ вҲ— 

> dP

|Ft . These W вҲ— processes are typically more complex than our likelihood-ratio process W (compare (104) in Appendix D.1 with (10)-(11)). More-over, they generally fail to satisfy the conditions (A)вҖ“(B) in Proposition 2 вҖ” con-ditions that uniquely characterize our identifying likelihood ratio process. 

g-formula distributions (Definition 4) are a strict subclass, corresponding to the choice Оӣ a, вҲ— = na(N ) for some intervention na. We give in Appendix D.1.1 an example of a distribution QвҲ— satisfying (IP) that is not a g-formula distribution. 7.3. The g-formula. By Lemma 2 we can express the ( Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensating measure of N as 

L(dt Г— dx ) = X

> jвҲҲI d

Оҙj (dx )dLjt = Оҙa(dx )dnat (N ) + X

> jвҲҲI d\{ a}

Оҙj (dx )dОӣjt ,(21) where Оҙj is the Dirac measure located at j, or equivalently L(dt Г— { j}) = dLjt for each j вҲҲ I d, where we associate a finite variation process with a random measure in the usual way. We obtain a (non-extended) g-formula, [37], by substituting this 

L into the distributional representation of Lemma 1. 

Theorem 2 (g-formulas) . If the conditions of Lemma 1-2 and Theorem 1 hold, then 

EP [ ЛңYt] = EP

WtYt

 = EQ[Yt],

> 10 In fact, the distribution specified by Lemma 2 matches вҖҷcounterfactual distributionsвҖҷ as derived in [50, Section 3].
> 19

for each t вҲҲ [0 , T ], where W is given in (11). The rightmost term can be expressed via the g-formula distribution, and we get in the canonical setting that 11 

EQ[Yt] = 

Z 

> ([0 ,T ]Г—I p)N

Yt

 (tk, x k)k

dF Q

> вҲһ

(t1, x 1, . . . ).(22) Here, F Q 

> вҲһ

is the unique distribution that satisfies F Qn = F Q 

> вҲһ

в—Ұ ПҖвҲ’1 

> n

, where F Qn takes the form (18) but with L in (21) replacing ОІ in (19). 

Example 1 (Continued) . We present the g-formula for the atomic intervention. The ( Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensator equals 

L(dt Г— dx ) = Оҙa(dx )d ЛҶПҶt + X

> jвҲҲI d\{ a}

Оҙj (dx )dОӣjt ,

and we can define the finite-dimensional distribution on the canonical space as: 

dF Qn (t1, x 1, . . . , t n, x n) = nQ

> i=1

n

I(tiвҲ’1 < t i) P

> tiвҲ’1<u<t i

 1 вҲ’ d ВҜLu

 P  

> jвҲҲI d

Оҙj (dx i)dLjti

o

where we have defined t0 := 0, and d ВҜLt = L(dt Г—I d) = P 

> jвҲҲI d

dLjt . Each Lj depends predictably on the history, i.e. Ljt

 (tk, x k)k

 = Ljt

 (tk, x k)k|ti

 on {ti < t вүӨ ti+1 },but this dependence is not explicitly shown for ease of notation. This leads to the 

g-formula 

EP [ ЛңYt] = 

Z 

> ([0 ,T ]Г—I d)N

Yt

 (tk, x k)k

dF Q

> вҲһ

(t1, x 1, . . . )(23) as in Theorem 2. We have not seen the formula (23) been studied in its general form in the literature. If the outcome functional of interest is survival ЛҷYt(ПҶ) = I(ПҶdt = 0), then the integrand on the right-hand side of (23) is I  P  

> iвүҘ1

I(ti вүӨ t, x i = d) = 0 .If the ( P, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N j for jМё = a is absolutely continuous with respect to the Lebesgue measure, i.e. Оӣ j = R В· 

> 0

О»jsds , we get the following somewhat simpler finite-dimensional distribution under Q for this intervention: 

dF Qn (t1, x 1, . . . , t n, x n) = eвҲ’ P   

> jМё=a
> Rtn
> 0О»jsds

В·

> n

Y

> i=1

I(tiвҲ’1 < t i)

 X  

> jМё=a

Оҙj (dx i)О»jti dt i + Оҙa(dx i)d ЛҶПҶti



.

If additionally ЛҶ ПҶ = 0 (prevention of treatment), the distribution coincides with the (finite-dimensional) distribution RRND associate with the same intervention. 7.4. A characterization of the identifying likelihood ratio process. We give in Proposition 2 different characterizations of the process W in (11). In particu-lar, we show a specific unique connection between W and the consistency and exchangeability conditions (12)-(13), which we elaborate on immediately following the proposition. 

Proposition 2. W in (11) is the unique (up to indistinguishability) process W h

which satisfies conditions (A)-(B), where                   

> 11 Since N=Id in the canonical setting, we have by the definitions in Section 4.4 that Y(Пү) = ЛҷY(N(Пү)) = ЛҷY(Пү) for each Пүin the canonical space. That is, ЛҷY=Y, and the notations ЛҷYand Y
> can be used interchangeably.
> 20

(A) W h = E(Kh), where Kht = R t 

> 0

hsdMas , and h is an F[0 ,T ]-predictable process such that Kh is a local ( P, F[0 ,T ])-martingale of finite variation and W h вүҘ 0, and (B) I(W h 

> В·

> 0) = I(В· < П„ a) P -a.s. It can furthermore be represented as 

Wt = I(П„ a > t )

P

> 0<s вүӨt

(1 вҲ’ dОӣas ) = E(вҲ’Na)t

E(вҲ’Оӣa)t

,(24) 

Wt = I(П„ a > t )

eвҲ’Оӣa,c t

Q  

> ПғkвүӨt

P (П„ a > Пғk|F Пғk вҲ’) ,(25) where {Пғk}k are the ordered jump times of Оӣa and Оӣa,c := R В· 

> 0

I(вҲҶ Оӣas = 0) dОӣas is the continuous part of Оӣa.With the set-up and notation in Section 4, W has the alternative representation 

Wt = I(П„ a > t )

P0<s вүӨt(dОӣas )вҲҶN as (1 вҲ’ dОӣas )1вҲ’вҲҶN as

.(26) In this case, Kat = вҲ’ R tвҲ§П„ a  

> 011вҲ’вҲҶnas(N)вҲ’вҲҶОӣ as

dM as , and Оӣa coincides with П„ a

Оӣa+ П„ a

na(N )вҲ’

2 R В·вҲ§ П„ a 

> 0

вҲҶnas (N )dОӣas , where we use the notation П„ Zt := ZП„ вҲ§t for a process Z and random time П„ .Any MPP likelihood ratio is a stochastic exponential of a predictable process integrated against a basic martingale [21]. Of all exponentials driven by the вҖҷex-changeability martingaleвҖҷ Ma, W is the only such process that is nonzero exactly as dictated by the consistency condition (12). Since W is the unique process satisfying (A)-(B) above, it is also the unique such process that is non-decreasing up to right before П„ a, i.e. progressively upweighting subjects as long as they follow the regime and assigning a weight of zero to the subjects who no longer follow the regime. The evaluability conditions (9) and (14) can be understood informally through the expressions (24)-(25) as follows. For the subjects who have followed the regime up to any point in time, the conditional probability of following the regime in the next infinitesimal time increment given the strict observed history should not be too small, so that the cumulative product of these probabilities (over infinitesimal time increments) is not too small. 12 In particular, the product in (24) factorizes over the increments where there is a strictly positive probability of deviating from the regime, which admits an explicit representation as a product of conditional probabilities, and the increments where there is only an infinitesimal probability of deviating, which is a product-integral over the continuous part of Оӣa and reduces to the exponential of minus the continuous part, which leads to (25). 7.5. Gill and Robins, and the validity of g-formulas. GR04 conjectured that a g-formula similar to ours (equation (22)) could be derived under versions of the consistency, exchangeability, and positivity assumptions [15, p. 4]. 13 They also                                          

> 12 Note that we in (25) can replace P(П„a>Пғk|F ПғkвҲ’) with P(П„a>Пғk|F ПғkвҲ’, П„ aвүҘПғk), where the latter can be understood as P{П„aвүҘПғk}(П„a>Пғk|F ПғkвҲ’), the conditional expectation with respect to the event probability measure P{П„aвүҘПғk}(В·) := P(В· вҲ© { П„aвүҘПғk})/P (П„aвүҘПғk).
> 13 In particular, their вҖҷTreatment plans,вҖҷ [15, Section 3], which вҖқprescribes subsequent action timepoints, ... so long as no further longitudinal data timepoint intervenesвҖқ can be precisely formulated as predictable interventions as we define them.
> 21

mention three possible complications associated with formally establishing the va-lidity of the formula, which they refer to as вҖқcorrectness,вҖқ вҖқuniqueness,вҖқ and the вҖқno-explosions condition.вҖқ 14 The developments in this paper provide a way of ad-dressing and resolving their concerns, which we elaborate on here. We can resolve these issues because we have identified the compensating measure in (21), given a rigorous formulation of the integral involved (Lemma 1), and because we charac-terize the potential outcomes law (Definition 2). 

вҖў Correctness: GR04 raise the question of whether and when the right-hand side of (22) does, in fact, determine the law of the potential outcome vari-able of interest. In theories involving a finite number of random variables, if treatment variables are continuous, it is known that one can construct po-tential outcomes satisfying standard consistency and sequential exchange-ability assumptions having a distribution that is not given by the g-formula; see [14, 67] for examples and discussions. In our work, as long as we characterize ЛңN as in Definition 2 and Y and ЛңY as in Section 4.4, Theorem 2 says that the P -expectation ЛңYt is given by the right-hand side of (22) under the conditions of Definition 3. That is, we have made the law of ЛңN and thus ЛңY explicit, and our formulas are true when the conditions of our theorems are true. Since the g-formula is equivalent to the IPW formula in Theorem 1, the IPW formulas presented here are correct in the same sense. 

вҖў Uniqueness: GR04вҖҷs second concern is the formulaвҖҷs possible dependence on the selected versions of the conditional probability laws involved. Allowing versions to be chosen haphazardly could conceivably lead to an ill-defined expression. In this case, uniqueness results for the distribution of MPPs offer a so-lution. For instance, [26, Theorem 8.2.3] says that the MPP distribution is uniquely determined by the canonical compensator. 15 Moreover, owing to the uniqueness of compensators, any other choice of compensator will give the same answer. This is because any two compensators agree except on a null set, i.e. a set which does not contribute to the numerical value of the integral. 

вҖў No explosions: Finally, GR04 recognize the possibility that explosions can be introduced when a given regime is imposed, and the question is whether the g-formula has total probability 1. That our g-formulas have total prob-ability 1 is immediate under our assumptions (9) and (14), when W is a likelihood ratio process. 8. Relation to discrete-time theories 

We can embed commonly studied discrete-time data structures in the point pro-cess data structure by adding specific restrictions on the compensator processes.  

> 14 GR01 tackle comparable uniqueness and correctness issues when extending RobinsвҖҷs theory to settings where the random variables involved are continuous, as opposed to discrete. They address the correctness issue by imposing continuity restrictions on the conditional laws involved in the formula, thus taking a different approach than we follow here. Interestingly, we have not seen the issues raised in [14, 15, 67] mentioned in the discrete-time literature beyond these works.
> 15 GR04 anticipate that the conditional distributions might be chosen in such a canonical manner.
> 22

This allows us to establish connections between our definitions and definitions that are used in existing causal inference theories, and draw parallels between the iden-tification results contained in our paper and well-known existing results from the discrete-time literature [37, 40, 34]. The result is stated as a proposition, followed by some comments. More detailed comparisons with discrete-time approaches will be made in future work. 

Proposition 3. Suppose that the indices of N are ordered such that N = ( N 1,. . . , N dвҲ’1, N a), and consider real numbers {Оёk}k and {в„“jk}k,j for k = 1 , . . . , K + 1 and j = 1 , . . . , d вҲ’ 1 such that 0 < в„“ 11 < В· В· В· < в„“ dвҲ’11 < Оё 1 < в„“ 12 < В· В· В· < в„“ dвҲ’12 < Оё 2 < В· В· В· < Оё K+1 < T. (27) Suppose that the N a-compensator is constant except at the times {Оёk}k where it may jump, and that each N j -compensator for j вҲҲ I d \ { a} is constant except at the times {в„“jk}k where it may jump. Consider a static regime na as in Example 1 such that the possible action times, i.e. jump times of na, are contained in {Оёk}k.Put Ak = вҲҶ N aОёk , ak = вҲҶ naОёk , Ljk = вҲҶ N jв„“jk

, ЛңLjk = вҲҶ ЛңN jв„“jk

, and ЛңAk = вҲҶ ЛңN aОёk for j =1, . . . , d вҲ’1 and k = 1 , . . . , K +1, where ЛңN is a potential outcome process associated with the intervention na as in Definition 2. Suppose that P ( ВҜAK+1 = ВҜ aK+1 ) > 0, where we write ВҜVk = ( V1, . . . , V k) for a discrete process {Vk}k. The sets of observed covariates and treatments are then temporally ordered according to (27), i.e. 

вҹЁL11, . . . , L dвҲ’11 , A 1, L 12, . . . , L dвҲ’12 , A 2, . . . , A K+1 вҹ©.(28) Moreover, defining Lk = {Ljk|j = 1 , . . . , d вҲ’ 1}, and Lk,<j as the вҖҷpastвҖҷ of the observed non-treatment variables up to before Ljk;

Lk,<j = Lli|(1 вүӨ i < k and 1 вүӨ l вүӨ d вҲ’ 1) or ( i = k and 1 вүӨ l < j ) ,(29) we have that 

вҖў Equivalence of exchangeability and consistency conditions. The exchangeability condition (13) with ЛңY = ( ЛңN 1, . . . , ЛңN aвҲ’1, ЛңN a+1 , . . . , ЛңN d) is equivalent to the independencies ЛңLm+1 вҠҘвҠҘ Am| ВҜLm, ВҜAmвҲ’1 = ВҜ amвҲ’1 for each m = 1 , . . . , K, (30) where ЛңLk = { ЛңLjk|j = 1 , . . . , d вҲ’1}, and V k = ( Vk, V k+1 , . . . ). That is, setting 

A = {Ak|k = 1 , . . . , K + 1 }, L = {Lk|k = 1 , . . . , K + 1 }, and V = A вҲӘ L,(13) is with the given ЛңY equivalent to the independence conditions in the RCISTG ( A, V) model for this intervention; see [34, Definition 62]. Furthermore, our consistency condition is equivalent to 

Ljk = ЛңLjk P -a.s. on { ВҜAkвҲ’1 = ВҜ akвҲ’1}(31) for j = 1 , . . . , d вҲ’ 1 and k = 1 , . . . , K .

вҖў Equivalence of positivity conditions. Our positivity condition (9) is equivalent to 

P (Ak = ak| ВҜLk, ВҜAk) > 0 P -a.s. on { ВҜAkвҲ’1 = ВҜ akвҲ’1} for each k. (32) Moreover, under (9) and the premises of this proposition, the likelihood ratio regularity condition in Definition 3 (iii) holds. 

> 23

вҖў Reduction of the data-generating law. Each canonical compensator 

Оұj fixed in Definition 2 can be associated with functions {f jk }k, where each 

f jk (Lk,<j , ВҜAkвҲ’1) is some version of the conditional expectation of Ljk given 

Пғ(Lk,<j , ВҜAkвҲ’1) under P . Specifically, the following holds surely: вҲҶОұjв„“jk

(N ) = f jk (Lk,<j , ВҜAkвҲ’1) for each k and jМё = a,where Оұj in Оұ = ( Оұ1, . . . , Оұ d) is the selected version of the canonical com-pensator in Definition 2. Moreover, Definition 2 is equivalent to: ЛңAk = ak,P ( ЛңLjk = 1 | ЛңLk,<j , ВҜЛңAkвҲ’1 = ВҜ akвҲ’1) = f jk ( ЛңLk,<j , ВҜakвҲ’1),

(33) 

P -a.s. for each k = 1 , . . . , K + 1 and j = 1 , . . . , d вҲ’ 1, where ЛңLk,<j is the вҖҷpastвҖҷ of the non-treatment variables of the potential outcome process up to before ЛңLjk, defined similarly to Lk,<j in (29). A larger set of outcomes are identified under the FRCISTG independence as-sumptions than the RCISTG independence assumptions. The former set of as-sumptions allows for the identification of expected outcomes under a regime that is a function of the natural value of treatment; see [34, Appendix C.2]. We do not consider such regimes, and thus the required exchangeability conditions are therefore not developed here. The consistency condition (31) coincides with [18, Technical point 19.2] (see also [34, Definition 60 (ii)]). (32) is an вҖҷalmost surelyвҖҷ formulation of the condition in [18, Technical point 19.2]. The lower equality in (33) is what Richardson and Robins call вҖқmodularityвҖқ [34, Definition 15]. 16 

Instead of characterizing ЛңN via its law as in Definition 2, one could alternatively consider ЛңN as being explicitly realized from its law starting with a collection of specified вҖқerror terms.вҖқ Such explicit constructions could lead to further connec-tions with definitions which recursively define potential outcomes based on earlier variables in the ordering [34, Definition 1]. However, we do not follow this path here. 9. Identification with multiple interventions in the general MPP setting 

This section extends the results presented in the preceding sections to interven-tions on multiple components in general MPP settings. Assuming familiarity with the earlier sections, we first introduce the necessary notation for multiple interven-tions, then present the main identification theorem (Theorem 3), before examining some of its consequences through examples. 9.1. Setup, notation, and a general identification result for multiple inter-ventions. We consider a non-explosive observed data MPP N on the time domain [0 , T ], with mark space ( X, X ) assumed to be a Borel space. We assume N consists of components ( N i)iвҲҲI d , where each N i is itself an MPP operating on its own mark                                     

> 16 To make the connection explicit, note that P( ЛңLjk= 1 |ЛңLk,<j ,ВҜЛңAkвҲ’1= ВҜ akвҲ’1) coincides with
> P( ЛңLjk= 1 |ЛңLk,<j ) because ВҜЛңAkвҲ’1= ВҜ akвҲ’1P-a.s., and (33) thus states, as [34, Equation (30)], that
> P ЛңLjk= 1 ЛңLk,<j =lk,<j
> =fjk(lk,<j ,ВҜakвҲ’1) = P Ljk= 1 Lk,<j =lk,<j ,ВҜAkвҲ’1= ВҜ akвҲ’1
> ,
> when the conditioning sets involved have positive probability.
> 24

space ( Xi, X i), where the XiвҖҷs are pairwise disjoint subsets of X. In addition, we include here an observed baseline random element L taking values in ( S, S). 

N takes values in the canonical space ( N XT , HXT ), and ( L, N ) takes values in the canonical space ( S Г— N XT , S вҠ— H XT ). 17 Following the definitions of [26], which match those used in Section 4.1, we say that a process Z on ( S Г— N XT , S вҠ— H XT )is optional if Zt(l, ПҶ ) = Zt(l, ПҶ |t) and predictable if Zt(l, ПҶ ) = Zt(l, ПҶ |tвҲ’) for every (l, ПҶ ) вҲҲ S Г— N XT , and similarly for processes defined on ( N XT , HXT ). Aligning with [26], we adopt analogous definitions for kernels and random measures defined on these spaces. We consider interventions on components of N = ( N i)iвҲҲI d indexed by J вҠҶ I d.Analogously to Definition 1, we specify an intervention nj on component j вҲҲ J as a predictable counting measure on the canonical space, i.e. satisfying nj (l, ПҶ, dt Г—

dx ) = nj (l, ПҶ |tвҲ’, dt Г— dx ) for each ( l, ПҶ ) вҲҲ S Г— N XT and t вҲҲ [0 , T ]. Each nj is a treatment rule that fixes values of the component j. More precisely, the mapping ( l, ПҶ ) 7 вҶ’ nj (l, ПҶ ) is a mapping from S Г— N XT to N Xj 

> T

, the canonical space of N j . Thus, nj produces a feasible realization of the component j, which may depend on the strict past of l, ПҶ , analogously to Definition 1. By [26, Theorem 4.2.2], there exists a canonical compensator Оұ of N with respect to P and F[0 ,T ], the filtration generated by ( L, N ) on [0 , T ]. This is a uniquely defined predictable kernel which satisfies 

Оұ(L, N, dt Г— dx ) defines a compensator of N (dt Г— dx )with respect to P and F[0 ,T ].

(34) The potential outcome process ЛңN can be characterized by this canonical compen-sator and the interventions nj under study, analogously to Definition 2 in Section 4.2. Appendix C gives details on this characterization in the general MPP setting. Analogously to Section 4.4, the outcome functional of interest ЛҷY is a bounded optional stochastic process on ( N XT , HXT ), i.e. satisfying ЛҷYt(ПҶ) = ЛҷYt(ПҶ|t) for each (t, ПҶ ) вҲҲ [0 , T ] Г— N XT . We define the observed outcome as Y := ЛҷY (N ) and the potential outcome as ЛңY := ЛҷY ( ЛңN ), where ЛңN is the potential outcome process arising from these interventions. From the interventions and the observed data, we recover the regime-specific deviation times 

П„ j := inf t > 0|N j ((0 , t ] Г— D)Мё = nj (L, N, (0 , t ] Г— D) for some D вҲҲ X j ,(35) and the overall deviation time П„ J := вҲ§jвҲҲJ П„ j , analogously to (8). To focus on the important things, we assume in the following that Xj is finite for each j вҲҲ J;then П„ J is an optional time with respect to F[0 ,T ], and NJt := I(П„ J вүӨ t) has a compensator ОӣJ with respect to P and F[0 ,T ].Analogous to the construction in Section 4.5, we assume that 

P

 Z T

> 0

dОӣJs

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣJs

< вҲһ



= 1 ,(36) so that 

KJ := вҲ’

Z В·

> 0

dNJs вҲ’ dОӣJs

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣJs

,(37) 

> 17 Appendix A.3 or [26, 20] provide details on the canonical space of MPPs.
> 25

is well-defined, and both KJ and E(KJ ) are local ( P, F[0 ,T ])-martingales. 

Theorem 3 (Identification with multiple interventions in the general MPP set-ting) . With the setup and notation thus far in Section 9, assume that the following regularity conditions hold on the canonical compensator Оұ in (34), the interventions 

nj , and each j, h вҲҲ J such that jМё = h:

Оұ l, ПҶ, {t} Г— Xj Оұ l, ПҶ, {t} Г— Xh = 0 ,(38) 

Оұ l, ПҶ, {t} Г— Xj Оұ l, ПҶ, {t} Г— X\J  = 0 ,(39) 

nj (l, ПҶ, {t} Г— Xj )Оұ l, ПҶ, {t} Г— X\J  = 0 ,(40) 

nj (l, ПҶ, {t} Г— Xj )nh(l, ПҶ, {t} Г— Xh) = 0 ,(41) for each l, ПҶ and t, where X\J := вҲӘjвҲҲI d\J Xj . Under the identifying conditions (i) Consistency: YtI(П„ J > t ) = ЛңYtI(П„ J > t ) P -a.s. for each t вҲҲ [0 , T ], (ii) Exchangeability: ОӣJ defines a compensator of NJ with respect to both 

F[0 ,T ] and F ЛңY  

> [0 ,T ]

under P , where F ЛңY  

> [0 ,T ]

= {F t вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңY )}tвҲҲ[0 ,T ],(iii) Likelihood-ratio regularity: EP [E(KJ )t] = 1 for each t вҲҲ [0 , T ], we have for each t вҲҲ [0 , T ] that 

EP [ ЛңYt] = EP [E(KJ )tYt] = EQ[Yt],(42) where dQ = E(KJ )T dP . Assuming the canonical setting where the underlying measurable space is ( S Г— N XT , S вҠ— H XT ) and ( L, N ) = Id , 18 the g-formula can be represented as 

EP [ ЛңYt] = EQ[Yt] = 

Z

> S

Z 

> ([0 ,T ]Г—X)N

Yt

 (tk, x k)k

dF Q

> вҲһ

(t1, x 1, . . . |l)dF L(l),(43) where dF L is the distribution of L under P , and dF Q

> вҲһ

(t1, x 1, . . . |l) is a regular version of the conditional distribution of N given L = l under Q. Similarly to (18), its finite-dimensional conditional distribution takes the form 

dF Qn (t1, x 1, . . . , t n, x n|l) = I(t1 < В· В· В· < t n) В· Z(0) (l, dt 1 Г— dx 1)

В· Z(1) (( tk, x k)k|t1 , l, dt 2 Г— dx 2)В·В· . . . В· Z(nвҲ’1) (( tk, x k)k|tnвҲ’1 , l, dt n Г— dx n).

Similarly to (19), this finite-dimensional distribution is determined by the kernels 

Z(i)(( tk, x k)k|ti , l, dt Г— dx ) = P

> ti<u<t

(1 вҲ’ L (( tk, x k)k|ti , l, du Г— X)) L(( tk, x k)k|ti , l, dt Г— dx ),Z(0) (l, dt Г— dx ) = P

> 0<u<t

(1 вҲ’ L (( tk, x k)k|0, l, du Г— X)) L(( tk, x k)k|0, l, dt Г— dx ),

where L in the previous equation is the ( Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensating measure of N ,which under the regularity conditions (38)-(41) is given by 

L(dt Г— dx ) = X

> jвҲҲJ

I(x вҲҲ Xj )nj (L, N, dt Г— dx ) + X

> jвҲҲI d\J

I(x вҲҲ Xj )Оӣ j (dt Г— dx ),

(44) where we have in (44) suppressed the dependence on ( l, ПҶ ) = Пү вҲҲ О© = S Г— N XT .Here, Оӣ j is the compensator of N j with respect to P and F[0 ,T ].

> 18 See Appendix A.3 or [26, 20] for details on the canonical setting.
> 26

The regularity conditions (38)-(41) are sufficient to ensure the joint existence, on the same probability space, of observed and potential outcomes with the respective correct laws such that the consistency and exchangeability conditions in Theorem 3 are satisfied. See Appendix B for details; in particular, compare the conditions (38)-(41) with (54). These regularity conditions mirror the conditions used to establish Proposition 1 in Section 6; (38)-(39) parallel (16), and (40)-(41) parallel (4). In plain English, under (38)-(41), the consistency and exchangeability conditions in Theorem 3 impose no hidden restrictions on the observed data law. The exchangeability condition in Theorem 3 (ii) is implied by the assumption that the ( P, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of П„ J

N j is also a ( P, F ЛңY 

> [0 ,T ]

)-compensator of П„ J

N j

for each j вҲҲ J, as we show in Lemma 9 (Appendix D). This latter condition is in turn implied by certain sequential independence conditions involving latent event times and marks; see (76)-(77) in Appendix B (stated there with different notation and for the full potential outcome process, rather than the potential outcome of interest). 9.2. Illustrative examples. Similar to the examples in Section 4.3, the following two examples apply Theorem 3 to an extension of the clinical scenario from Example 3, which resemble settings studied in the literature. Our formalization differs from other approaches in that we use our explicit definitions of interventions, formally derive formulas from identification conditions, and make the assumed decision-making narratives explicit. We provide specific comments following the examples. The observed data structure consists of a baseline random element L measured at or before t = 0, and an MPP N = ( N a, N v , N c, N d, N в„“), where the components are 

вҖў N a, an MPP for treatment allocations, 

вҖў N v , a counting process recording clinic visits (during which treatment as-sessments occur), 

вҖў N c, a right-censoring counting process, 

вҖў N d, a death counting process, 

вҖў N в„“, an MPP recording other covariates. The observed data filtration F[0 ,T ] is generated by L and N .As in Example 3, we assume there is a delay Оҙ > 0 between assessment and allocation. (We discuss an alternative observed data structure in Section 9.3.) That is, the doctor first reviews the patientвҖҷs information (assessment) and then, after a short delay, prescribes treatment (allocation). Specifically, we assume that ВҜN a(dt ) = N v (dt вҲ’ Оҙ),(45) where ВҜN a(dt ) := N a(dt Г— Xa) counts treatment allocations of all types, and where we use the convention Z(dt )I(t < 0) = 0 for a random measure Z. The detailed structure of the delay is not essential; we therefore take Оҙ to be deterministic for simplicity. 19 Formally, the delay assumption implies that the process ВҜN a counting treatment allocations is predictable with respect to the observed filtration. Theorem 3 is formulated for MPP components with general mark spaces. To connect the examples to the theorem, we embed each one-dimensional counting                               

> 19 More generally, we can e.g. allow for delay structures on the form Tak=Tvk+Оҙkwith
> ОҙkвүҘПө > 0 and FTvk-measurable Оҙk, where {Tak}kand {Tvk}kare the jump times of ВҜNaand Nv
> respectively. This allows for subject-specific delays which may depend on clinic, physician, etc.
> 27

process component as follows: for i вҲҲ { v, c, d }, we set the corresponding mark set to the singleton Xi = {i} and identify the counting process N i(dt ) with the MPP 

N i(dt Г— dx ) := Оҙi(dx )N i(dt ). If i is also an intervention component, i.e. i вҲҲ J, we similarly make the identification ni(l, ПҶ, dt Г— dx ) = Оҙi(dx )ni(l, ПҶ, dt ). With these identifications, the observed data structure and the interventions nj match the setup of Section 9.1. The outcome of interest is survival at time t, Yt = I(N dt = 0), with potential outcome of interest ЛңYt = I( ЛңN dt = 0), where ЛңN is the potential outcome process arising under a given set of interventions. 

Example 4 (Joint intervention on schedule, assignment, and censoring) . Consider a medical study with the observed data structure just described. A researcher is interested in the effect of a protocol that specifies both the timing of treatment visits (the schedule) and subsequent treatment assignments, while preventing cen-soring. This joint intervention modifies visit schedule, treatment assignment, and ensures that everybody remains under follow-up (no censoring). Consequently, the intervention components are J = {v, a, c }.The schedule intervention is 

nv (l, ПҶ, dt ) = ОәвҲ—(l, ПҶ, dt ),

where ОәвҲ— is a predictable kernel specifying the visit schedule based on strictly earlier events; that is, ОәвҲ—(l, ПҶ, dt ) = ОәвҲ—(l, ПҶ |tвҲ’, dt ), and ОәвҲ—(l, ПҶ, (0 , В·]) is a one-dimensional counting process trajectory for each l and ПҶ.The allocation intervention is 

na(l, ПҶ, dt Г— dx ) = ПҖвҲ—(l, ПҶ, t, dx )ПҶv (dt вҲ’ Оҙ),(46) where ПҶv (dt вҲ’ Оҙ) = ВҜ ПҶa(dt ) by the delay assumption (45) (i.e., allocations occur Оҙ

time units after the corresponding assessments). ПҖвҲ— is a predictable kernel specify-ing treatment assignment, i.e. ПҖвҲ—(l, ПҶ, t, dx ) is a rule that fixes treatment allocation at t given the strictly earlier events l, ПҶ |tвҲ’. The censoring prevention intervention is nc = 0. Define deviation times П„ v , П„ a, П„ c as in (35), set П„ J = П„ v вҲ§ П„ a вҲ§ П„ c, and suppose the ( P, F[0 ,T ])-compensator ОӣJ of I(П„ J вүӨ В· ) satisfies the positivity condition (36), so that KJ in (37) is well-defined. Under the conditions in Theorem 3, we get 

EP [ ЛңYt] = EP [E(KJ )tYt] = EQ[Yt],

where dQ = E(KJ )T dP . The compensator (44) figuring in the g-formula (43) is 

L(dt Г— dx ) = Оҙv (dx )ОәвҲ—(L, N, dt ) + I(x вҲҲ Xa)ПҖвҲ—(L, N, t, dx ) ВҜN a(dt )+ Оҙc(dx ) В· 0 + I(x вҲҲ Xв„“)Оӣ в„“(dt Г— dx ) + Оҙd(dx )Оӣ d(dt ),

where each Оӣ i is the ( P, F[0 ,T ])-compensator N i.

Example 5 (Intervention on treatment allocation while preventing censoring) .

Building on the same data structure, suppose an investigator wishes to estimate the effect of assigning treatment according to a deterministic rule at allocation times (depending only on the strict history), while preventing censoring. In this case, the intervention index set is J = {a, c }, where the allocation intervention na

is as in (46) and nc = 0. 

> 28

Define П„ a, П„ c as in (35), and set П„ J = П„ a вҲ§П„ c. We assume ОӣJ , the compensator of 

I(П„ J вүӨ В· ), satisfies the positivity condition (36), so that KJ in (37) is well-defined. Under the conditions of Theorem 3, we then get 

EP [ ЛңYt] = EP [E(KJ )tYt] = EQ[Yt],

where the compensating measure L figuring in the g-formula (43) is 

L(dt Г— dx ) = Оҙv (dx )Оӣ v (dt ) + I(x вҲҲ Xa)ПҖвҲ—(L, N, t, dx ) ВҜN a(dt )+ Оҙc(dx ) В· 0 + I(x вҲҲ Xв„“)Оӣ в„“(dt Г— dx ) + Оҙd(dx )Оӣ d(dt ).

Write {T ak }kвүҘ1 for the ordered jump times of ВҜN a = N a((0 , В·]Г—Xa), i.e., the observed treatment allocation times. If there is no censoring, the exchangeability condition Theorem 3 (ii) is equivalent to 20 

I(П„ a > T ak ) вҠҘвҠҘ ЛңY |F T ak вҲ’, П„ a вүҘ T ak for each k вүҘ 1,(47) see Appendix D.3. 

On preventing censoring. Examples 4 and 5 follow central discrete-time causal in-ference works [37, 18], where right-censoring is addressed through a hypothetical intervention that prevents it. Identification results for this intervention in the MPP setting are covered as a special case of our theorems. The relationship between this identification strategy and commonly studied identification strategies in the classi-cal survival literature will be explored in subsequent work. 9.3. Comparison with RGvdLвҖҷs examples and identification claims. As noted in Remark 1 in Section 2, RGvdL develop estimation methods under the assumption that their formulas follow from existing results in GR01. On the other hand, GR01 state that extending their discrete-time theory to counting process data is an open problem. In this section, we assess some of RGvdLвҖҷs statements in light of Theorem 3 and our derived Examples 4-5. We also draw connections to the broader literature on causal inference with counting process data that studies distributions satisfying the invariance property (IP) (Definition 5 in Section 7.2). RGvdLвҖҷs observed data structure and the data structure in Examples 4-5 differ in the underlying decision-making narratives. RGvdL perhaps implicitly adopt the perspective that raw time stamps directly represent the true causal ordering. Specifically, they define вҖқLet T a 

> 1

< T a 

> 2

< . . . be the random times at which the treatment regime ... may changeвҖқ [49, p. 2473], where вҖқat visit T ak , the doctor considers ... to decide to continue or to change the treatmentвҖқ [49, p. 2471]. However, in reality, a doctor cannot simultaneously review information, decide on treatment, and implement an action. As argued in Section 4.1, a real-life decision involves a delay between information gathering and action. A more plausible assumption is that these events are temporally separated: after the patient arrives, the doctor reviews information, before deciding on treatment. This motivates the data structure in Examples 4-5 (building on the clinical scenario from Example 3), which distinguish between treatment visits ( N v ) and treatment allocations ( N a) through the delay assumption (45). These examples align with the broader theme of this article (see also Section 4.1 and Examples 1-3) and of seminal work in discrete time [37, 44, 34]: making decision-making narratives explicit.               

> 20 (47) is also equivalent to I(П„a> T ak)вҠҘвҠҘЛңY|F TakвҲ’,for each kвүҘ1 (see Appendix D.3).
> 29

Nonetheless, RGvdLвҖҷs observed data structure is, technically, a special case of our data structure if we set Оҙ = 0 and redefine our MPP appropriately: specifically, we can align the data structure in Section 9.2 with theirs by setting Оҙ = 0 and redefining the visit counting process N v and the allocation MPP N a to be a single MPP N a(dt Г— dx ) that counts treatment visits with allocations occurring at the same time. 

Comparison to RGvdLвҖҷs вҖқintervention on treatment and schedule.вҖқ. Example 4 is conceptually similar to RGvdLвҖҷs вҖқintervention on treatment and schedule,вҖқ [49, Definition 2], with Оҙ = 0, i.e., with instantaneous treatment allocations at treatment visit times. This Оҙ = 0 case is technically covered by Theorem 3, 21 and we can thus directly compare formulas and assumptions. Both our g-formula distribution and the distributions studied by RGvdL satisfy the invariance property (IP), which also appears in many related causal inference works. However, there seems to be a distinction between our and RGvdLвҖҷs targets of inference: we define interventions on schedule through ОәвҲ—, where ОәвҲ—(l, ПҶ, (0 , В·]) is a counting process trajectory that explicitly specifies visit times based on past events, while RGvdL replace the observed treatment compensator with вҖҷsome choiceвҖҷ Оӣ a, вҲ—.As emphasized in Remark 2 in Section 7.2, there are many distributions that satisfy (IP) without corresponding to explicit (deterministic) interventions. Thus, without specific details, RGvdLвҖҷs approach appears similar to RRND and many related works on causal inference with counting processes that study distributions obtained by modifying the treatment compensator; see, e.g., [50, 51, 47, 48, 52]. These works study distributions satisfying (IP), but they do not generally specify explicit interventions. RGvdL differ from these related works in that they claim their formulas follow from existing identification results in GR01; specifically, for identifying their вҖқin-tervention on treatment and scheduleвҖқ estimand, RGvdL assert without further justification that a specific sequential independence condition is sufficient to derive their formula [49, p. 2477, stated in natural language]. In Appendix B, we develop sequential independence assumptions which verifies the formulas in Example 4 under the regularity conditions (38)-(41) вҖ” see (76)-(77) in Appendix B. The argument showing that these conditions are sufficient relies on the presence of latent event times which are not present in RGvdLвҖҷs asserted sufficient condition. In Proposition 5 in Appendix D.7, we sketch an alternative argument that would verify the formulas in Example 4, under an alternative se-quential independence condition. However, this argument relies on the implausible additional assumption that all observed event times are predictable вҖ” a restriction that is unlikely to hold in real-world applications. 

Comparison to RGvdLвҖҷs вҖқintervention on treatment assigned.вҖқ. RGvdLвҖҷs вҖқinter-vention on treatment assigned,вҖқ [49, Definition 1], corresponds to Example 5 with 

Оҙ = 0. RGvdL claim that a sequential independence condition resembling (47) is sufficient to identify their proposed estimand; see [49, Assumption 2].                  

> 21 Specifically, when Оҙ= 0, using that Na(dt Г—dx ) is the MPP counting treatment visits and treatment allocations with no delay, consider na(l, ПҶ, dt Г—dx ) = ПҖвҲ—(l, ПҶ, t, dx )ОәвҲ—(l, ПҶ, dt ), with ПҖвҲ—
> and ОәвҲ—as in Example 4. The assignment function nasatisfies na(l, ПҶ, dt Г—dx ) = na(l, ПҶ |tвҲ’, dt Г—dx ), and Theorem 3 therefore applies.
> 30

Our derived exchangeability condition (47) hold by design if the treatment were sequentially randomized at assignment times. Yet when Оҙ = 0, na in (46) is optional, i.e. na(l, ПҶ, dt Г— dx ) = na(l, ПҶ |t, dt Г— dx ), but it is not predictable, and Theorem 3 does not apply in general. Consequently, it is unclear whether the sequential randomization condition (47) is sufficient for identifying their estimand. Subsequent work [31], building on an earlier draft of this manuscript, will describe independence conditions that validate one of RGvdLвҖҷs proposed formulas. 9.4. Interpretation and broader implications. Because our identifying condi-tions and the associated likelihood ratio process are derived from explicit interven-tion definitions, the interpretation of our estimands is transparent. In particular, investigators applying our methods must first specify their particular intervention of interest, for example, as briefly sketched in our Examples 1-5. This clarity is valuable in the MPP setting. The path and distribution spaces are comparatively rich and, as noted in Remark 2, most MPP distributions do not correspond to explicit interventions. In Example 5, treatment was assigned at allocation times according to a rule that depends on strictly earlier events. The exchangeability condition (47) matches single-world conditional independencies that would hold by design if treatment were sequentially randomized at each allocation time. Our identifying conditions can, in principle, be tested in a future experiment. (See [40] for a similar formulation in the sequential treatment setting.) 10. Estimation 

The identifying likelihood ratio process in Theorem 3 has a generic form specified by an optional time П„ J and its compensator ОӣJ . This generic form motivates customized estimation techniques. Developing robust and efficient estimators under our conditions is an ongoing research project which will be reported in separate work. In this section, we give a high-level sketch of an alternative estimation strategy motivated by the IPW formula in Theorem 3: 22 

E(KJ ) = I(П„ J > В·)

P0<s вүӨВ· (1 вҲ’ dОӣJs ) .

For concreteness, we study estimators for EP [ ЛңYT ] where ЛңYT is survival at time T

under the interventions and identification assumptions in Example 5. Recall from that example that П„ J = П„ a вҲ§ П„ c, where П„ a is the deviation time for the regime on treatment allocation (defined as in (35)), and П„ c is the censoring time. In this case, we have that ОӣJ = П„ J

Оӣa + П„ J

Оӣc, where Оӣa is the compensator of the treatment-deviation counting process Na = I(П„ a вүӨ В· ) and Оӣ c is the compensator of the censoring counting process N c = I(П„ c вүӨ В· ). We assume a model for ОӣJ ,e.g. informed by subject matter knowledge of what makes subjects deviate from the regime. In practice, we would have to work with a specific choice of either 1) ОӣJ = R П„ J вҲ§В·  

> 0

dО· s(L, N |sвҲ’), where О· is a model for the cumulative hazard of П„ J

given covariates L and the strict history of N , or 2) ОӣJ = R П„ J вҲ§В·  

> 0

dО· as (L, N |sвҲ’) +   

> 22 This representation of E(KJ) can be derived using the techniques from the proof of Propo-sition 2.
> 31

R П„ J вҲ§В·  

> 0

dО· cs(L, N |sвҲ’) where О·a (resp. О·c) is the cumulative hazard for П„ a (resp. П„ c)given covariates L and the strict history of N . We omit a detailed discussion of such models and associated statistical inference here for brevity, and refer instead to [25] for a thorough treatment which is relevant to our strategy. Having fitted the models in 1) or 2) based on an i.i.d. population of size n, we can construct a weight estimator using individual iвҖҷs covariate history to predict that individualвҖҷs weight: ЛҶV i = I(П„ J,i > В·)

P0<s вүӨВ· 

 1 вҲ’ dЛҶОӣJ,i s

 ,

where П„ J,i is the minimum of П„ a and П„ c for individual i, and ЛҶОӣJ,i is an estimate (prediction) of ОӣJ under individual iвҖҷs history. We can then consider the simple plug-in estimator 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

ЛҶV iT Y iT ,(48) which resembles IPW estimators that have been described in the discrete literature [17]. In addition to (48), one could consider closely related estimators such as Hajek estimators, e.g. with stabilized weights [18, Technical Point 12.2], but we do not explore such alternatives here. Assuming standard integrability conditions and that the trajectories of ОӣJ and the elements of {ЛҶОӣJ,i } take values in a Donsker class, the estimator is consistent for 

EP [E(KJ )T YT ] and asymptotically normal provided that the models are correctly specified. To formally establish the result, one can use empirical process results ensuring weak convergence of root-n residuals of empirical means involving random functions, see e.g. [59, Lemma 19.24], the Hadamard differentiability of the product-integral, and the functional delta method. Another alternative is to construct parametric g-formula estimators of (43) under assumptions on hazard models for the compensator (e.g., proportional or additive hazards [1, 2]), and then use Monte Carlo simulation based on the fitted hazard models to estimate the integral. The above simple estimation strategies offer valid inference for all data-generating laws where the model for ОӣJ is correctly specified and the Donsker and integrability conditions are met. 11. Discussion 

This work provides several conceptual and methodological contributions. First, we formalize interventions in MPP settings as explicit actions nj that fix treat-ment trajectories, which is of interest to decision-makers who want to assess the consequences of actions. Second, we characterize potential outcomes arising from such interventions, thus enabling formal reasoning about data-generating mecha-nisms. We then operationalize MPP analogues of canonical identifying conditions (consistency, exchangeability, and positivity) and formally derive and characterize corresponding identification formulas. The simple identifying likelihood-ratio pro-cess E(KJ ), which we have not seen emphasized in related works, is derived directly from the intervention rules and transparently connects interventions and identifying conditions to g-formulas. 

> 32

Next, by operationalizing identifying conditions that reduce to established discrete-time conditions under appropriate restrictions on compensators, we bridge the gap between discrete-time causal inference and the counting process literature for sur-vival and event history analysis. While the original aim of the article was to develop nonparametric identification conditions for effects of dynamic regimes for MPP data structures, we discovered conditions that apply much more broadly to data described by stochastic processes. Our martingale-centered approach furthermore circumvents the complications as-sociated with conditioning on events with probability zero, a problem that is com-monly encountered in other approaches. Future work involves developing analogues to results found in related missing data literature, such as the projection formula [36, 60], to develop efficient and robust estimators. Additional research directions include formalizing natural value processes and studying interventions that depend on these processes. Another intriguing area is to provide a graphical representation of our exchangeability con-dition. The irrelevance relation is similar to that of local independence [10, 52], but differs from existing approaches in that the irrelevance concerns a random element recorded at baseline rather than a stochastic process which unfolds over time. Re-search in this direction likely requires development of new graphical identification criteria. 

Acknowledgements 

We are grateful to Johan Sebastian Ohlendorff for feedback on an earlier draft of this manuscript. His comments revealed an oversight in the scope of our identi-fication results. This motivated our development of the explicit construction and regularity conditions in Appendix B, and led us to re-examine and refine our in-tervention definition. The resulting revisions sharpened the presentation. We also thank Niklas Nyboe Maltzahn for many stimulating discussions during the prepa-ration of this work, and for feedback on earlier drafts of this manuscript. 

Funding 

P.C.R. and K.R. were supported by the Research Council of Norway grant вҖқ315323 STEINF - NFR Stochastic differential equations for robust evaluation of cancer treatments.вҖқ M.J.S. was supported by the Swiss National Science Founda-tion (project funding, grant number: 207436). 

References 

[1] Odd Aalen, Гҳrnulf Borgan, and Hakon Gjessing. Survival and Event His-tory Analysis: A Process Point of View (Statistics for Biology and Health) .Springer, 2008. [2] Per Andersen, Гҳrnulf Borgan, Richard Gill, and Niels Keiding. Statistical Models Based on Counting Processes . Springer Series in Statistics. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1993. [3] Ryan M. Andrews and Vanessa Didelez. Insights into the cross-world indepen-dence assumption of causal mediation analysis. Epidemiology , 32(2):209вҖ“219, December 2020. [4] Pierre BrВҙ emaud. Point Processes and Queues . Springer Series in Statistics. Springer, New York, NY, 1981 edition, September 1981. 

> 33

[5] Samuel N Cohen and Robert J Elliott. Stochastic Calculus and Applications .Probability and Its Applications. Springer, New York, NY, 2 edition, November 2015. [6] Daniel Commenges and Anne GВҙ egout-Petit. A general dynamical statistical model with causal interpretation. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) , 71(3):719вҖ“736, 2009. [7] Richard J. Cook and Jerald F. Lawless. The Statistical Analysis of Recurrent Events . Springer New York, 2007. [8] A. Philip Dawid. Decision-theoretic foundations for statistical causality. Jour-nal of Causal Inference , 9(1):39вҖ“77, January 2021. [9] A. Philip Dawid and Vanessa Didelez. Identifying the consequences of dy-namic treatment strategies: A decision-theoretic overview. Statistics Surveys ,4(none), January 2010. [10] Vanessa Didelez. Graphical models for marked point processes based on local independence. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology) , 70(2):245вҖ“264, February 2008. [11] Thomas R. Fleming and David P. Harrington. Counting Processes and Survival Analysis . John Wiley & Sons, Inc., September 2005. [12] Richard D. Gill. Lectures on survival analysis , page 115вҖ“241. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1994. [13] Richard D. Gill and Soren Johansen. A survey of product-integration with a view toward application in survival analysis. The Annals of Statistics ,18(4):1129вҖ“1170, December 1990. [14] Richard D. Gill and James M. Robins. Causal inference for complex longitu-dinal data: The continuous case. The Annals of Statistics , 29(6), December 2001. [15] Richard D. Gill and James M. Robins. Causal inference for complex longi-tudinal data: The continuous time g-computation formula. arXiv preprint ,2004. [16] Sheng-Wu He, Jia-Gang Wang, and Jia-An Yan. Semimartingale theory and stochastic calculus . CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, September 1992. [17] M. A. HernВҙ an, B. Brumback, and J. M. Robins. Marginal structural models to estimate the causal effect of zidovudine on the survival of hiv-positive men, 2000. [18] Miguel A. HernВҙ an and James M. Robins. Causal Inference . CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, February 2021. [19] L. Hu and J. W. Hogan. Causal comparative effectiveness analysis of dynamic continuous-time treatment initiation rules with sparsely measured outcomes and death. Biometrics , 75(2):695вҖ“707, 2019. [20] Martin Jacobsen. Point process theory and applications marked point and piecewise deterministic processes. In Probability and Its Applications , pages 3вҖ“7. BirkhВЁ auser-Verlag, Boston, 2006. [21] Jean Jacod. Multivariate point processes: Predictable projection, radon-nikodym derivatives, representation of martingales. Probability Theory and Related Fields , 1975. [22] Jean Jacod and Albert N. Shiryaev. Limit Theorems for Stochastic Processes ,volume 288 of Grundlehren der Mathematischen Wissenschaften [Fundamental Principles of Mathematical Sciences] . Springer-Verlag, Berlin, second edition, 

> 34

2003. [23] Brent A. Johnson and Anastasios A. Tsiatis. Semiparametric inference in observational duration-response studies, with duration possibly right-censored. 

Biometrika , 92(3):605вҖ“618, 2005. [24] Olav Kallenberg. Foundations of Modern Probability . Springer International Publishing, 2021. [25] Michael R. Kosorok. Introduction to Empirical Processes and Semiparametric Inference . Springer New York, 2008. [26] GВЁ unter Last and Andreas Brandt. Marked point processes on the real line .Probability and Its Applications. Springer, New York, NY, 1995 edition, Au-gust 1995. [27] Judith J. Lok. Statistical Modelling of Causal Effects in Time . PhD the-sis, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, 2001. Naam instelling promotie: VU Vrije Universiteit Naam instelling onderzoek: VU Vrije Universiteit. [28] Judith J. Lok. Statistical modeling of causal effects in continuous time. The Annals of Statistics , 36(3), June 2008. [29] Judith J. Lok, Richard D. Gill, Aad van der Vaart, and James M. Robins. Estimating the causal effect of a time-varying treatment on time-to-event using structural nested failure time models. Statistica Neerlandica , 58(3):271вҖ“295, August 2004. [30] Werner Nagel and Rolf Steyer. Probability and Conditional Expectation: Fun-damentals for the Empirical Sciences . Wiley, March 2017. [31] Johan Sebastial Ohlendorff, Kjetil RГёysland, Anders Munch, and Thomas Gerds. Identification and estimation of causal effects under treatment-assigned-at-visit interventions in continuous time. In preparation , page 823вҖ“843, August 2026. [32] Judea Pearl. Causality: Models, Reasoning and Inference . Cambridge Univer-sity Press, New York, NY, USA, 2nd edition, 2009. [33] P. Protter. Stochastic Integration and Differential Equations . Springer, 2005. [34] Thomas S. Richardson and James M. Robins. Single World Interven-tion Graphs (SWIGs): A Unification of the Counterfactual and Graph-ical Approaches to Causality. Technical Report 128, Center for Statis-tics and the Social Sciences, University of Washington, 2013. Avail-able online at: https://csss.uw.edu/research/working-papers/single-world-intervention-graphs-swigs-unification-counterfactual-and. [35] J. M. Robins. Marginal Structural Models versus Structural Nested Models as Tools for Causal Inference , pages 95вҖ“133. Springer New York, 2000. [36] J. M. Robins and A. Rotnitzky. Recovery of Information and Adjustment for Dependent Censoring Using Surrogate Markers , pages 297вҖ“331. BirkhВЁ auser Boston, 1992. [37] James Robins. A new approach to causal inference in mortality studies with sustained exposure periods вҖ“ application to control of the healthy worker sur-vivor effect. Mathematical Modeling , 7(9):1393вҖ“1512, 1986. [38] James M. Robins. Addendum to вҖңa new approach to causal inference in mor-tality studies with a sustained exposure periodвҖ”application to control of the healthy worker survivor effectвҖқ. Computers & Mathematics with Applications ,14(9-12):923вҖ“945, 1987. 

> 35

[39] James M. Robins. The analysis of randomized and nonrandomized aids treat-ment trials using a new approach to causal inference in longitudinal studies. In Lee Sechrest, Howard Freeman, and Albert Mulley, editors, Health Service Research Methodology: A Focus on AIDS , page 113вҖ“159. U.S. Public Health Service, National Center for Health Services Research, Washington, DC, 1989. [40] James M. Robins. Causal inference from complex longitudinal data. In Maia Berkane, editor, Latent Variable Modeling and Applications to Causality , pages 69вҖ“117, New York, NY, 1997. Springer New York. [41] James M. Robins. Optimal structural nested models for optimal sequential decisions. In Proceedings of the Second Seattle Symposium in Biostatistics ,pages 189вҖ“326. Springer, 2004. [42] James M. Robins and Dianne M. Finkelstein. Correcting for noncompliance and dependent censoring in an aids clinical trial with inverse probability of cen-soring weighted (ipcw) log-rank tests. Biometrics , 56(3):779вҖ“788, September 2000. [43] James M Robins, Miguel A HernВҙ an, and Uwe Siebert. Effects of multiple interventions. Comparative quantification of health risks: global and regional burden of disease attributable to selected major risk factors , 1:2191вҖ“2230, 2004. [44] James M. Robins and Thomas S. Richardson. Alternative graphical causal models and the identification of direct effects. In Causality and Psychopathol-ogy: Finding the Determinants of Disorders and their Cures . Oxford University Press, February 2011. [45] P. R. Rosenbaum and D. B. Rubin. The central role of the propensity score in observational studies for causal effects. Biometrika , 70(1):41вҖ“55, 1983. [46] D. B. Rubin. Estimating causal effects of treatments in randomized and non-randomized studies. Journal of Educational Psychology , 66(5):688вҖ“701, 1974. [47] PЛҡ al Ryalen, Mats Stensrud, Sophie FossЛҡ a, and Kjetil RГёysland. Causal infer-ence in continuous time: An example on prostate cancer therapy. Biostatistics ,19(4):600вҖ“613, 2018. [48] PЛҡ al C. Ryalen, Mats J. Stensrud, and Kjetil RГёysland. The additive hazard es-timator is consistent for continuous-time marginal structural models. Lifetime Data Analysis , 25(4):611вҖ“638, February 2019. [49] Helene C. Rytgaard, Thomas A. Gerds, and Mark J. van der Laan. Continuous-time targeted minimum loss-based estimation of intervention-specific mean outcomes. The Annals of Statistics , 50(5), October 2022. [50] Kjetil RГёysland. A martingale approach to continuous-time marginal struc-tural models. Bernoulli , 2011. [51] Kjetil RГёysland. Counterfactual analyses with graphical models based on local independence. The Annals of Statistics , 40(4):2162вҖ“2194, 2012. [52] Kjetil RГёysland, PЛҡ al Ryalen, Mari NygЛҡ ard, and Vanessa Didelez. Graphical criteria for the identification of marginal causal effects in continuous-time sur-vival and event-history analyses, 2022. [53] Aaron L Sarvet and Mats J Stensrud. The natural value of treatment and its importance for causal inference. Annual Review of Statistics and Its Applica-tion , 13, 2025. [54] Glen A. Satten, Somnath Datta, and James Robins. Estimating the marginal survival function in the presence of time dependent covariates. Statistics & Probability Letters , 54(4):397вҖ“403, October 2001. 

> 36

[55] Thomas H. Scheike and Torben Martinussen. Dynamic Regression Models for Survival Data . Springer, NY, 2006. [56] Albert N. Shiryaev and Jan Kallsen. The cumulant process and EsscherвҖҷs change of measure. Finance and Stochastics , 6(4):397вҖ“428, 2002. [57] Alexander Sokol and Niels Richard Hansen. Exponential martingales and changes of measure for counting processes. Stochastic Analysis and Appli-cations , 33(5):823вҖ“843, August 2015. [58] Jinghao Sun and Forrest W. Crawford. Causal identification for continuous-time stochastic processes, 2022. [59] A. W. van der Vaart. Asymptotic Statistics . Cambridge Series in Statistical and Probabilistic Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, 1998. [60] Aad W. van der Vaart. On robinsвҖҷ formula. Statistics & Decisions. International Mathematical Journal for Stochastic Methods and Models ,22(3):171вҖ“200, 2004. [61] David Williams. Probability with Martingales . Cambridge University Press, February 1991. [62] Shu Yang. Semiparametric estimation of structural nested mean models with irregularly spaced longitudinal observations. Biometrics , 78(3):937вҖ“949, April 2021. [63] Andrew Ying. Causality for complex continuous-time functional longitudinal studies with dynamic treatment regimes, 2024. [64] Andrew Ying. Causality for functional longitudinal data. In Francesco Lo-catello and Vanessa Didelez, editors, Proceedings of the Third Conference on Causal Learning and Reasoning , volume 236 of Proceedings of Machine Learn-ing Research , page 665вҖ“687. PMLR, April 1вҖ“3 2024. [65] Jessica G. Young. Story-led causal inference. Epidemiology , 35(3):289вҖ“294, April 2024. [66] Jessica G Young, Miguel A HernВҙ an, and James M Robins. Identification, estimation and approximation of risk under interventions that depend on the natural value of treatment using observational data. Epidemiologic Methods ,3(1):1вҖ“19, Jan 2014. [67] Zhengguo Yu and Mark J. van der Laan. Construction of counterfactuals and the g-computation formula. department of biostatistics. University of California , 2002. [68] Mingyuan Zhang, Marshall M. Joffe, and Dylan S. Small. Causal inference for continuous-time processes when covariates are observed only at discrete times. 

The Annals of Statistics , 39(1), February 2011. 

Appendix Overview 

Appendix A reviews concepts from stochastic process theory and describes the canonical space of point process realizations. Appendix B provides a joint construc-tion of observed and potential outcome processes such that identifying conditions are satisfied. Appendix C characterizes potential outcome processes in the gen-eral MPP setting. Appendix D contains supporting lemmas and technical results. Proofs of results not found in the main text are in Appendix E. An overview of notation is provided in Appendix F. 

> 37

Appendix A. Basic definitions and notation 

A.1. Basic definitions. This definitions in this section can be found in [22, 33, 26]. It is assumed that the reader is familiar with Пғ-algebras, probability measures, probability spaces, etc. We refer to [33] for a treatment of stochastic integration with semimartingales. A filtered probability space is a probability space (О© , G, Q ) equipped with a fil-tration G[0 ,T ] = {G t}tвҲҲ[0 ,T ] of increasing (in t) Пғ-algebras which are sub-Пғ-algebras of G. The filtration is right-continuous if Gt = вҲ©s>t Gs, and complete if it includes all null sets of Q; i.e. all subsets A of B whenever B вҲҲ G and Q(B) = 0. The filtration generated by an MPP is right-continuous (see e.g. [26, Theorem 2.2.4]), but not complete. For a stochastic process Z and fixed Пү вҲҲ О©, the function t 7 вҶ’ Zt(Пү) is the sample path or trajectory of Z corresponding to Пү. A process is cadlag if almost all its paths are right-continuous with left limits. Two processes are indistinguishable if almost all of their sample paths agree. The variation of Z over [0 , T ] is defined to be 

V[0 ,T ](Z)( Пү) = sup  

> ПҖвҲҲP [0 ,T ]

X

> tiвҲҲПҖ

|Zti+1 (Пү) вҲ’ Zti (Пү)|,

where P[0 ,T ] are all finite partitions of [0 , T ]. Z is of finite variation if almost all its paths are of finite variation, i.e. V[0 ,T ](Z)( Пү) < вҲһ for almost all Пү. It is of integrable variation if EQ[V[0 ,T ](Z)] < вҲһ.A [0 , T ] вҲӘ {вҲһ} -valued measurable map П„ on О© is a G[0 ,T ]-optional time if {П„ вүӨ

t} вҲҲ G t for t вҲҲ [0 , T ]. For a process Z, a property p holds locally if there is a sequence of optional times {Пғn}n increasing up to вҲһ Q-a.s. such that Пғn ZI (Пғn > 0) has the property p for each n. For an optional time П„ , the stopped Пғ-algebra at П„ ,

GП„ = {A вҲҲ G T |{ П„ вүӨ t} вҲ© A вҲҲ G tвҲҖt вҲҲ [0 , T ]}, is a further Пғ-algebra on О©. A process Z is G[0 ,T ]-adapted if Zt is Gt-measurable for each t вҲҲ [0 , T ]. The smallest filtration which makes Z adapted is called the natural filtration of Z. A process is G[0 ,T ]-predictable if it, as a map from [0 , T ] Г— О© to R, is measurable with respect to the predictable Пғ-algebra P on [0 , T ]Г—О©. This Пғ-algebra is generated, for instance, by the G[0 ,T ]-adapted processes whose paths are continuous (equivalently left-continuous, with the left limit at t = 0 defined as the value of the path at t = 0) functions of t. A process is G[0 ,T ]-optional if it is measurable with respect to the optional Пғ-algebra. This is the Пғ-algebra on [0 , T ] Г— О© which is generated by the 

G[0 ,T ]-adapted and cadlag processes. When working with natural filtrations, which are not completed, predictability and optionality are not properties that depend on the probability measure. A G[0 ,T ]-adapted and cadlag stochastic process Z is a martingale (resp. sub-martingale ) with respect to G[0 ,T ] and Q if Zt is integrable under Q and EQ[Zt|G s] = 

Zs Q-a.s. (resp. вүҘ Zs Q-a.s.) for each s вүӨ t and each t. It is square integrable if also sup tвҲҲT EQ[Z2 

> t

] < вҲһ. Z is a semimartingale if there exist processes M and 

V where M is a local martingale and V is a finite variation process such that 

Z = Z0 + M + V . If the compensator of an adapted counting process has finite variation, then the difference between the compensator and the counting process is a local martingale. It is evidently also a semimartingale. For a semimartingale Z with Z0 = 0 we denote by E(Z) the stochastic exponen-tial, also called the DolВҙ eans-Dade exponential, of Z. This is the unique solution to 

> 38

the SDE 

Ut = 1 + 

Z t

> 0

UsвҲ’dZ s,

where we adopt the assumption that Zt = 0 when Z is a process and t < 0. For semimartingales Z, U , the quadratic covariation process [Z, U ] is defined by [Z, U ]t := ZtUt вҲ’

Z t

> 0

ZsвҲ’dU s вҲ’

Z t

> 0

UsвҲ’dZ s,

We use the notational convention [ Z, Z ] = [ Z]. The predictable variation process 

вҹЁZ, U вҹ©P is, when it exists, the compensator of [ Z, U ], and it is then the unique predictable process which makes [ Z, U ] вҲ’ вҹЁ Z, U вҹ©P a local martingale. Consider another measurable space ( E, E) which we assume is not too вҖқlarge.вҖқ  

> 23

A random measure on [0 , T ] Г— E is a family Ој = {Ој(Пү; dt Г— dx ) : Пү вҲҲ О©} of non-negative measures on ([0 , T ] Г— E, B[0 ,T ] вҠ— E ) satisfying Ој(Пү, {0} Г— E) = 0 identically. Let ЛңP = P вҠ— E and ЛңО© = О© Г— [0 , T ] Г— E. A function on ЛңО© that is ЛңP-measurable is called predictable . A random measure Ој is predictable if 

Z

> [0 ,В·]Г—E

H(Пү, s, x )Ој(Пү, ds Г— dx )is predictable for every predictable function H for which the integral exists. Op-tionality is analogously defined. Let ( S, S) and ( Y, Y) be measurable spaces. A kernel from ( S, S) to ( Y, Y)(abbreviated: from S to Y ) is a mapping K from S Г— Y to [0 , вҲһ] such that K(В·, A )is measurable for each A вҲҲ Y and K(x, В·) is a measure for each x вҲҲ S.Recall from Section 3 that F[0 ,T ] is the natural filtration of N . Since F[0 ,T ] is right-continuous, we get by [33, I Theorem 3] that for any F[0 ,T ]-adapted and cadlag process Z and open B вҠӮ R, the real-valued function 

Пү 7 вҶ’ inf {s > 0 : Zs(Пү) вҲҲ B}

on О© is an F[0 ,T ]-optional time, a result we repeatedly invoke without mention in this text. A.2. Conditional independence and expectation with respect to a Пғ-algebra mixed with an event. For a probability space (О© , F, P ) and A вҲҲ F ,the assignment PA(В·) = P (A вҲ© В· )/P (A) is a probability measure on (О© , F) provided that P (A) > 0. In that case we make the identification 

Z вҠҘвҠҘP Y |G , A вҮ” Z вҠҘвҠҘPA Y |G ,(49) for random variables Z, Y and sub-Пғ-algebra G of F, where we often omit the P

subscript in the left independence statement. That is, we understand conditional independence with respect to G, A under P as conditional independence with respect to G under PA.If Z is integrable, we define 

EP [Z|G , A ] := EP [ZI A|G ]

EP [IA|G ] ,

with the usual convention вҖқ 00 = 0вҖқ. As it happens, we are in Appendix D.7 in-terested in logical implications of the above type of conditional independence on 

> 23 e.g. a Blackwell space; see [22, p. 65].
> 39

partial conditional expectations on the form вҖқ EP [ZY |G , A ]вҖқ, where the variable 

Y has support in A. A result of this is that, if A is a P -null set, conditional expectations of this type are degenerate. In the calculations in Appendix D.7 we will study conditional independences of the type (49) for sets of the form A = {П„ a > T n}, and following the above we can assume without loss of generality that P (A) > 0, and that PA(В·) = P (A вҲ© В· )/P (A)is a probability measure on (О© , F). A.3. The canonical space of point process realizations. We closely follow the presentation in [26] here. Readers who are interested in a more detailed exposition can consult Section 2.2. therein. We consider a mark space ( X, X ) which is a Borel space, and write ВҜX = X вҲӘ{вҲҮ} ,where вҲҮ is the вҖҷirrelevant mark.вҖҷ Denote by N X the space of all double sequences (tn, x n)n вҲҲ (R+ Г— X)N which satisfies 0 < t 1 вүӨ t2 вүӨ . . . tn < t n+1 and xn вҲҲ X if tn < вҲһ

tn = tn+1 and xn = xn+1 = вҲҮ if tn = вҲһ.

Following foundational literature on MPPs on the real line [20, 26] there is a one-to-one correspondence between each element ПҶ = ( tn, x n)n вҲҲ N X and a corresponding counting measure 

ПҶ = X

> nвүҘ1

I(tn < вҲһ)Оҙ(tn,x n)

on ( R+ Г— X, B(R+) вҠ— X ). If the mark space is ( Ip, 2Ip ), it is also represented as a 

p-dimensional counting process, 

ПҶ = ( ПҶ1, . . . , ПҶ p),

where ПҶi is recovered from the counting measure and double sequence by ПҶi =

ПҶ((0 , В·] Г— { i}) = P 

> k

I(tk вүӨ В· , x k = i). On N X , we let HX be the smallest Пғ-algebra which makes the projection map-pings (tn, x n)n 7 вҶ’ tj ,(50) (tn, x n)n 7 вҶ’ xj ,(51) measurable for each j. Denote by N XT the subset of N X defined by the restriction of each element of N X to [0 , T ] Г— X, where the restriction is defined by the map (tn, x n)n 7 вҶ’ (tвӢҶn, x вӢҶn)n, where (tвӢҶn, x вӢҶn) = 

(

(tn, x n) if tn вүӨ T

(вҲһ, вҲҮ) otherwise. This restriction is also defined by the map ПҶ 7 вҶ’ ПҶ|T . Denote by HXT the smallest 

Пғ-algebra which makes the restriction of the projection mappings (50)-(51) mea-surable. Following [26, Remark 2.2.5], we define the canonical space of point processes on the real line and on the bounded interval [0 , T ]. We allow for a random element 

L taking values in a measurable space ( S, S) to be included, where, in practice, L

signifies variables that are measured at or before time t = 0. 

Definition 6 (Canonical setting) . We say that we are in the canonical setting if 

> 40

(i) (О© , F) = ( N X , HX ), resp. (О© , F) = ( S Г— N X , S вҠ— H X ). (ii) N = Id , resp. ( L, N ) = Id .The canonical setting for realizations restricted to [0 , T ] is similarly defined. Notationally, we add T subscripts in the relevant positions. We write N d := N Id

and Hd := HId (resp. N dT , := N Id 

> T

and HdT := HId 

> T

) for the case of a point process with marks in Id (on [0 , T ]), which can be identified with a d-dimensional counting process (on [0 , T ]). A.3.1. Canonical compensators. Several objects that are defined on a filtered mea-surable space (О© , FN 

> [0 ,T ]

, A) for an MPP N with mark space X and FNt = Пғ(N |t) вҲЁ

Пғ(L) can be described in terms of objects defined on the canonical space ( S Г—N XT , SвҠ—H XT ), where L takes values in ( S, S). In particular, there are one-to-one cor-respondences between several measure-theoretic concepts defined on (О© , FN 

> [0 ,T ]

, A, P )with so-called вҖқcanonicalвҖқ concepts on the canonical space. We highlight one such result which is relevant for the current text (see e.g. Theorem 4.2.2 in [26] for details and proof): 

Result 1 (Canonical compensator) . Suppose that О“( dt Г— dx ) is an FN 

> [0 ,T ]

- com-pensating measure of N under P . There is a unique random measure Оұ, called the canonical compensator of N with respect to P and FN 

> [0 ,T ]

, which satisfies О“( dt Г— dx ) = Оұ(L, N, dt Г— dx ) P -a.s. 

Оұ is a kernel from S Г— N XT to [0 , T ] Г— X which can be chosen such that, for each (l, ПҶ ) вҲҲ S Г— N XT and t вҲҲ [0 , T ], (1) Оұ(l, ПҶ, {0} Г— X) = 0 (2) Оұ(l, ПҶ, {t} Г— X) вүӨ 1(3) Оұ l, ПҶ, [ПҖвҖІвҲһ(ПҶ), вҲһ) Г— X = 0, where we have defined ПҖвҖІвҲһ(ПҶ) = inf t > 0 Оұ l, ПҶ, (0 , t ] Г— X = вҲһ . Оұ can also be chosen to be predictable on the canonical space. 

Appendix B. A joint construction of observed and potential outcomes such that identifying conditions are satisfied 

In this appendix, we construct observed and potential outcomes so that our exchangeability and consistency conditions are satisfied. We work on the time domain R+ instead of the bounded interval [0 , T ] used in the main text; all results in this appendix transfer to the bounded interval setting by removing from the canonical compensator and the interventions their mass on (T, вҲһ). Apart from the different time domains, the setup and notation is identical to the one used in Section 9. Specifically: 

вҖў N = ( N i)iвҲҲI d is an MPP with mark space ( X, X ), where X is a Borel space. Each component N i operates on its own mark subspace ( Xi, X i), where the XiвҖҷs are pairwise disjoint subsets of X.

вҖў L is a baseline random element taking values in ( S, S), and ( L, N ) take values in the canonical space ( S Г— N X , S вҠ— H X ) (see Appendix A.3). Each component N i of N takes values in the canonical space ( N Xi 

> T

, HXi 

> T

). 

вҖў We consider interventions on components indexed by J вҠҶ I d. For each 

j вҲҲ J, the intervention nj is a predictable counting measure on the canonical space; a kernel from S Г— N XT to R+ Г— Xj satisfying nj (l, ПҶ, dt Г— dx ) = 

> 41

nj (l, ПҶ |tвҲ’, dt Г— dx ). nj (l, ПҶ ) is for each ( l, ПҶ ) вҲҲ S Г— N XT a feasible trajectory for the process N j ; thus, the mapping ( l, ПҶ ) 7 вҶ’ nj (l, ПҶ ) is a map from 

S Г— N XT to N Xj 

> T

.To ensure the processes have the correct laws, we work with canonical com-pensators [26, Theorem 4.2.2, Theorem 4.3.9]. We fix a version of the canonical compensator Оұ of N with respect to P and the filtration generated by N and L. Оұ

is specified in (34), and it depends on both the baseline variable L and the MPP 

N .The canonical compensator and interventions nj characterize Лң Оұ, the canonical compensator of the potential outcomes process. The canonical compensators are related via 

Оұ(l, ПҶ, dt Г— dx ) = X

> jвҲҲJ

Оұj (l, ПҶ, dt Г— dx ) + Оұ\J (l, ПҶ, dt Г— dx ),(52) ЛңОұ(l, ПҶ, dt Г— dx ) = X

> jвҲҲJ

nj (l, ПҶ, dt Г— dx вҲ© (R+ Г— Xj )) + Оұ\J (l, ПҶ, dt Г— dx ),(53) where Оұj (l, ПҶ, dt Г—dx ) = Оұ(l, ПҶ, dt Г—dx вҲ©(R+ Г—Xj )), Оұ\J (l, ПҶ, dt Г—dx ) = Оұ(l, ПҶ, dt Г—

dx вҲ© (R+ Г— X\J )), and X\J = вҲӘiвҲҲI d\J Xi.Our construction relies on certain orthogonality assumptions. Specifically, for each j, h вҲҲ J satisfying jМё = h, we assume ВҜОұj (l, ПҶ, {t})ВҜ Оұh(l, ПҶ, {t}) = 0 ,

ВҜОұj (l, ПҶ, {t})ВҜ Оұ\J (l, ПҶ, {t}) = 0 ,

ВҜnj (l, ПҶ, {t})ВҜ Оұ\J (l, ПҶ, {t}) = 0 ,

ВҜnj (l, ПҶ, {t})ВҜ nh(l, ПҶ, {t}) = 0 ,

(54) for each l, ПҶ, and t. Recall that for a random measure Ој operating on a mark set 

XОј, we write ВҜ Ој(dt ) = Ој(dt Г— XОј) for its total measure. In particular, ВҜ Оұj (l, ПҶ, dt ) = 

Оұj (l, ПҶ, dt Г— Xj ), ВҜ Оұ\J (l, ПҶ, dt ) = Оұ\J (l, ПҶ, dt Г— X\J ) and ВҜ nj (l, ПҶ, dt ) = nj (l, ПҶ, dt Г—

Xj ). The conditions in (54) correspond to the regularity conditions (38)-(41) in The-orem 3. These conditions imply the regularity condition (89) in Appendix C (as-suming there are no unmeasured components in Appendix C). We also assume for each l, ПҶ that ЛңОұ(l, ПҶ, dt Г— X)I(Лң ПҖвҖІвҲһ(l, ПҶ ) < t ) = 0 ,(55) where Лң ПҖвҖІвҲһ(l, ПҶ ) = inf s > 0|ЛңОұ(l, ПҶ, (0 , s ] Г— X) = вҲһ . Combining this with (54), the regularity conditions (88)-(89) in Appendix C hold. These conditions ensure a well-defined canonical compensator suitable for constructing an MPP, as described in more detail in that appendix. We will in the construction have use of the component-specific survival functions 

U j (l, ПҶ |s, s, t ) := P

> s<u вүӨt

 1 вҲ’ ВҜОұj (l, ПҶ |s, du ), j вҲҲ J, (56) 

U \J (l, ПҶ |s, s, t ) := P

> s<u вүӨt

 1 вҲ’ ВҜОұ\J (l, ПҶ |s, du ),(57) 

U j (l, ПҶ |s, s, t ) := P

> s<u вүӨt

 1 вҲ’ ВҜnj (l, ПҶ |s, du ), j вҲҲ J. (58) 

> 42

Due to the orthogonality conditions (54), we have the factorizations 

U (l, ПҶ |s, s, t ) := P

> s<u вүӨt

(1 вҲ’ ВҜОұ(l, ПҶ |s, du )) = Y

> jвҲҲJ

U j (l, ПҶ |s, s, t )U \J (l, ПҶ |s, s, t ),(59) ЛңU (l, ПҶ |s, s, t ) := P

> s<u вүӨt

(1 вҲ’ ВҜЛңОұ(l, ПҶ |s, du )) = Y

> jвҲҲJ

U j (l, ПҶ |s, s, t )U \J (l, ПҶ |s, s, t ).(60) We will in the construction also use the kernels K, ЛңK characterized by the disinte-grations 

Оұ(l, ПҶ, dt Г— dx ) = K(l, ПҶ, t, dx )ВҜ Оұ(l, ПҶ, dt ),(61) ЛңОұ(l, ПҶ, dt Г— dx ) = ЛңK(l, ПҶ, t, dx )ВҜ ЛңОұ(l, ПҶ, dt ),(62) and the derived normalized kernels 

Kj (l, ПҶ, t, dx ) := K(l, ПҶ, t, dx вҲ© Xj )

K(l, ПҶ, t, X j ) ,(63) 

K\J (l, ПҶ, t, dx ) := K(l, ПҶ, t, dx вҲ© X\J )

K(l, ПҶ, t, X \J ) .(64) 

Lemma 3 (No shared mass) . Suppose that (54) holds. With the notation and variables defined in Proposition 4 (see Algorithm 1), we have for each j, h вҲҲ J with 

jМё = h, and for each k вүҘ 1, that 

P вҖІ(T jk = T hk < вҲһ) = P вҖІ(T jk = T \Jk < вҲһ)= P вҖІ(T jk = T \Jk < вҲһ) = P вҖІ(T jk = T hk < вҲһ) = 0 .

Proof. This follows immediately from the definitions in Algorithm 1 under the orthogonality assumptions (54). в–Ў

Proposition 4 (Construction of observed and potential outcomes that satisfy iden-tification conditions) . Suppose the canonical compensators Оұ and Лң Оұ in (52)-(53) satisfy the orthogonality conditions (54). Consider a probability space (О© вҖІ, FвҖІ, P вҖІ)supporting a random element LвҖІ at baseline such that P вҖІ(LвҖІ вҲҲ В· ) = P (L вҲҲ В· ). Construct MPPs N вҖІ = ( T вҖІ

> k

, X вҖІ

> k

)kвүҘ1 and ЛңN вҖІ = ( ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, ЛңXвҖІ

> k

)kвүҘ1 on (О© вҖІ, FвҖІ, P вҖІ) via Algorithm 1 below, using the random variables 

{Оҫjk, Оҫ \Jk , ЛңОҫk, О· jk, О· \Jk , ЛңО·k}kвүҘ1,j вҲҲJ .(65) Suppose that each random variable in (65) is uniformly distributed on [0 , 1] under 

P вҖІ, and that the following independence conditions hold under P вҖІ: 24 

(I1) For each k вүҘ 1: The variables {Оҫjk, О· jk, Оҫ \Jk , О· \Jk , ЛңОҫk, ЛңО·k, L вҖІ}jвҲҲJ are mutually independent ,

and {Оҫjk, Оҫ \Jk }jвҲҲJ are mutually independent conditional on FвҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

,

where FвҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

= Пғ(LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

) is the stopped Пғ-algebra at time T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

.(I2) For each k вүҘ 1: 

{Оҫjk, О· jk, Оҫ \Jk , О· \Jk , ЛңОҫk, ЛңО·k}jвҲҲJ вҠҘвҠҘP вҖІ Пғ LвҖІ, {Оҫjz , О· jz , Оҫ \Jz , О· \Jz , ЛңОҫz , ЛңО·z }z<k,j вҲҲJ

.    

> 24 The independence conditions (I1)-(I3) can e.g. be made to hold by choosing the randomizers in (65) to be mutually independent and independent of LвҖІunder PвҖІ.
> 43

(I3) For each k вүҘ 1 and j вҲҲ J:

Оҫjk вҠҘвҠҘP вҖІ {Оҫhk }hМё=j вҲӘ { Оҫ\Jk , О· \Jk } вҲӘ { Оҫhm, Оҫ \Jm , О· hm, О· \Jm , ЛңОҫm, ЛңО·m}hвҲҲJ,m>k |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

,О·jk вҠҘвҠҘP вҖІ {Оҫhk }hМё=j вҲӘ { Оҫ\Jk , О· \Jk } вҲӘ { Оҫhm, Оҫ \Jm , О· hm, О· \Jm , ЛңОҫm, ЛңО·m}hвҲҲJ,m>k |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

вҲЁ Пғ(T jk ),

where T jk is as in Step 5 in Algorithm 1. Consider deviation times as defined in (35); i.e., define for each j вҲҲ JП„ вҖІj := inf {s > 0|N вҖІj ((0 , s ] Г— D)Мё = nj (LвҖІ, N вҖІ, ((0 , s ] Г— D) for some D вҲҲ Xj },

and set П„ вҖІJ := вҲ§jвҲҲJ П„ вҖІj . Then, (P1) The observed and potential outcome processes coincide until just before the first regime deviation time, i.e. 

N вҖІ|tI(П„ вҖІJ > t ) = ЛңN вҖІ|tI(П„ вҖІJ > t ) for each t вүҘ 0; (P2) П„ вҖІJ

Оұj (LвҖІ, N вҖІ, В·) defines a compensator of П„ вҖІJ

N вҖІj with respect to both {F вҖІ 

> t

}t

and {F вҖІ 

> t

вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңN вҖІ)}t under P вҖІ for each j вҲҲ J, where {F вҖІ 

> t

}t is the filtration generated by ( LвҖІ, N вҖІ); (P3) The canonical compensator of N вҖІ with respect to {F вҖІ 

> t

}t and P вҖІ is Оұ, and the canonical compensator of ЛңN вҖІ with respect to { ЛңFвҖІ 

> t

}t and P вҖІ is Лң Оұ, where 

{ ЛңFвҖІ 

> t

}t is the filtration generated by ( LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ). In particular, Law P вҖІ (LвҖІ, N вҖІ) = Law P (L, N ) and Law P вҖІ (LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ) = Law P (L, ЛңN ). 

Proof. Conditional independencies. 

From the independence assumptions in Proposition 4 and the definitions in Algo-rithm 1, we can deduce the following: (D1) For each k вүҘ 1, {T hk , T \Jk }hвҲҲJ are mutually independent conditional on FвҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

under P вҖІ,(D2) For each k вүҘ 1 and j вҲҲ J,

V jk вҠҘвҠҘP вҖІ {T hk }hМё=j вҲӘ { T \Jk } FвҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

вҲЁ Пғ(T jk ).

Property (D1) follows from the mutual independence of {Оҫhk , Оҫ \Jk }hвҲҲJ given FвҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

(as assumed in (I1)), since for each j вҲҲ J, T jk is a function of ( LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

, Оҫ jk) (Step 5 of Algorithm 1), and similarly T \Jk is a function of ( LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

, Оҫ \Jk ) (Step 8). Because FвҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

= Пғ(LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

), and measurable transformations preserve condi-tional independencies, (D1) follows. Formally, this deduction can be made using a monotone class argument. Property (D2) can be deduced using similar techniques. From (I3), and the decomposition rule of conditional independence, we have 

О·jk вҠҘвҠҘP вҖІ {Оҫhk }hМё=j вҲӘ { Оҫ\Jk }|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

вҲЁ Пғ(T jk ).T hk is a function of ( LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

, Оҫ hk ) by Step 5 in Algorithm 1 (with h in place of j), and T \Jk is a function of ( LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

, Оҫ \Jk ) by Step 8. Moreover, V jk is a function of 

> 44

Algorithm 1 Scheme for generating observed and potential outcome processes such that identification conditions are satisfied  

> 1:

Initialize T вҖІ 

> 0

= ЛңT вҖІ 

> 0

= 0.  

> 2:

for k = 1 , 2, В· В· В· do  

> 3:

Define Ck = {Пү вҲҲ О©вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> i

(Пү) = ЛңT вҖІ 

> i

(Пү) and XвҖІ 

> i

(Пү) = ЛңXвҖІ 

> i

(Пү) for all i =1, . . . , k вҲ’ 1} 

> 4:

for j вҲҲ J do  

> 5:

Draw T jk from U j (LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

, T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

, В·) using Оҫjk 

> 6:

Set T jk = inf {s > ЛңT вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

: nj (LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ| ЛңT вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

, ( ЛңT вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

, s ] Г— Xj )Мё = 0 } 

> 7:

end for  

> 8:

Draw T \Jk from U \J (LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

, T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

, В·) using Оҫ\Jk 

> 9:

Draw ЛңT вҲ— 

> k

from ЛңU (LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ| ЛңT вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

, ЛңT вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

, В·) using ЛңОҫk 

> 10:

Set T вҖІ 

> k

= вҲ§hвҲҲJ T hk вҲ§ T \Jk 

> 11:

Set ЛңT вҖІ 

> k

= вҲ§hвҲҲJ T hk вҲ§ T \Jk ICk + ЛңT вҲ— 

> k

ICck

where Cck denotes the complement of Ck in О© вҖІ 

> 12:

for j вҲҲ J do  

> 13:

Set V jk = вҲҮ and V jk = вҲҮ 

> 14:

On {T jk < вҲһ} : draw V jk from Kj (LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

, T jk , В·) using О·jk 

> 15:

On {T jk < вҲһ} : set V jk to be the unique x вҲҲ Xj such that 

nj (LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ| ЛңT вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

, {T jk } Г— { x}) > 0 

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

Set V \Jk = вҲҮ and ЛңXвҲ— 

> k

= вҲҮ 

> 18:

On {T \Jk < вҲһ} : draw V \Jk from K\J (LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

, T \Jk , В·) using О·\Jk 

> 19:

On { ЛңT вҲ— 

> k

< вҲһ} : draw ЛңXвҲ— 

> k

from ЛңK(LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ| ЛңT вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

, ЛңT вҲ— 

> k

, В·) using Лң О·k 

> 20:

Set XвҖІ 

> k

= P 

> hвҲҲJ

V hk I(T hk = T вҖІ

> k

) + V \Jk I(T \Jk = T вҖІ

> k

) 

> 21:

Set ЛңXвҖІ 

> k

=  P  

> hвҲҲJ

V hk I(T hk = ЛңT вҖІ

> k

) + V \Jk I(T \Jk = ЛңT вҖІ

> k

)ICk + ЛңXвҲ— 

> k

ICck 

> 22:

end for 

(LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

, T jk , О· jk) by Step 14. Since measurable transformations preserve condi-tional independencies, and FвҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

= Пғ(LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

), (D2) follows, where the result can be shown from first principles via a monotone class argument. 

Verifying the consistency condition (P1). 

We verify that Algorithm 1 respects the consistency condition (P1). Consider first the initial time step. We show that, if П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> 1

, then (T вҖІ

> 1

, X вҖІ

> 1

) = ( ЛңT вҖІ

> 1

, ЛңXвҖІ

> 1

).(66) Suppose then that П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> 1

, and note that C1 = О© вҖІ by Algorithm 1. There are two cases to check: 

вҖў Case I: The first observed event is a treatment event (of some type j вҲҲ J), and the regime is followed. By Algorithm 1, the first observed event is a treatment event if, for some j вҲҲ J, T j 

> 1

= вҲ§hвҲҲJ T h 

> 1

вҲ§ T \J 

> 1

. The regime is followed whenever T j 

> 1

= вҲ§hвҲҲJ T h 

> 1

вҲ§ T \J 

> 1

, T j 

> 1

= T j 

> 1

, and the observed mark 

V j 

> 1

equals the вҖҷintervenedвҖҷ mark V j 

> 1

. By the assignments in Algorithm 1, 

> 45

we see that 

T вҖІ 

> 1

= T j 

> 1

= T j 

> 1

= ЛңT вҖІ

> 1

,XвҖІ 

> 1

= V j 

> 1

= V j 

> 1

= ЛңXвҖІ

> 1

,

which shows (66). 

вҖў Case II: The first observed event is a non-treatment event, and the regime is followed. The first observed event is a non-treatment event if T \J 

> 1

=

вҲ§jвҲҲJ T j 

> 1

вҲ§ T \J 

> 1

. The regime is followed through the first observed event if also T \J 

> 1

= вҲ§jвҲҲJ T j 

> 1

вҲ§ T \J 

> 1

. By the assignments in Algorithm 1, we see that 

T вҖІ 

> 1

= T \J 

> 1

= ЛңT вҖІ

> 1

,XвҖІ 

> 1

= V \J 

> 1

= ЛңXвҖІ

> 1

,

and (66) holds in this case also. Now assume inductively that ( T вҖІ 

> i

, X вҖІ 

> i

) = ( ЛңT вҖІ 

> i

, ЛңXвҖІ 

> i

) for all i < k whenever П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

.Then, we are on the event Ck. On Ck, the assignments in Algorithm 1 for the 

kth step mirror those for the first step. By arguing as in the two cases above, we conclude that if П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> k

, then also ( T вҖІ

> k

, X вҖІ

> k

) = ( ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, ЛңXвҖІ

> k

). The condition (P1) follows. 

Correctness of the laws. 

We now verify that ( LвҖІ, N вҖІ) has the correct law under P вҖІ. Toward that end we show that Оұ is the canonical compensator of N вҖІ under P вҖІ with respect to the filtration 

{F вҖІ 

> t

}t. It suffices to show that, for each k вүҘ 1, 

P вҖІ(T вҖІ 

> k+1

> t |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> k

) = U (LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

, T вҖІ

> k

, t ),(67) 

P вҖІ(T вҖІ 

> k+1

вҲҲ dt, X вҖІ 

> k+1

вҲҲ dx |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> k

) = U (LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

, T вҖІ

> k

, t вҲ’)Оұ(LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

, dt Г— dx ),(68) with U as in (59). This is sufficient because, by [26, Theorem 4.1.11, 4.2.2, 4.3.7, 4.3.8], (67)-(68) determine Оұ as the canonical compensator. Using (D1) and the definition T вҖІ 

> k+1

= вҲ§jвҲҲJ T jk+1 вҲ§ T \Jk+1 (in Algorithm 1), we have 

P вҖІ(T вҖІ 

> k+1

> t |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> k

) = P вҖІ

вҲ§jвҲҲJ T jk+1 вҲ§ T \Jk+1 > t |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> k



= Y

> jвҲҲJ

P вҖІ(T jk+1 > t |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> k

) В· P вҖІ(T \Jk+1 > t |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> k

)= Y

> jвҲҲJ

U j (LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

, T вҖІ

> k

, t )U \J (LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

, T вҖІ

> k

, t )= U (LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

, T вҖІ

> k

, t ),

(69) where we used the assignments in Algorithm 1, and (59). This proves (67). We now establish (68). Consider a measurable set B вҠҶ Xj for some j вҲҲ J. From the assignments in Algorithm 1, we have 

P вҖІ(T вҖІ 

> k+1

вҲҲ dt, X вҖІ 

> k+1

вҲҲ B|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> k

)= P вҖІ

T jk+1 вҲҲ dt, вҲ§hвҲҲJ\{ j}T hk+1 вүҘ t, T \Jk+1 вүҘ t, V jk+1 вҲҲ B|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> k



.

(70) Note that, due to Lemma 3, the measures I(T jk+1 вҲҲ dt, вҲ§hвҲҲJ\{ j}T hk+1 вүҘ t, T \Jk+1 вүҘ

t, V jk+1 вҲҲ B) and I(T jk+1 вҲҲ dt, вҲ§hвҲҲJ\{ j}T hk+1 > t, T \Jk+1 > t, V jk+1 вҲҲ B) agree except 

> 46

on an exceptional set, and we can consequently move freely between them in our calculations. By (D1) and (D2), the probability in (70) factorizes as 

P вҖІ(T jk+1 вҲҲ dt, вҲ§hМё=j T hk+1 вүҘ t, T \Jk+1 вүҘ t, V jk+1 вҲҲ B|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> k

)= P вҖІ(V jk+1 вҲҲ B|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> k

, T jk+1 = t)P вҖІ(T jk+1 вҲҲ dt |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> k

)

Г— P вҖІ(вҲ§hМё=j T hk+1 вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> k

)P вҖІ(T \Jk+1 вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> k

)= Kj (LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

, t, B )ВҜ Оұj (LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

, dt )

Г— Y

> hвҲҲJ

U h(LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

, T вҖІ

> k

, t вҲ’)U \J (LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

, T вҖІ

> k

, t вҲ’)= Оұ(LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

, dt Г— B)U (LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

, T вҖІ

> k

, t вҲ’),

where the last equality follows from 1): the identity Оұ(l, ПҶ, dt Г— B) = Kj (l, ПҶ, t, B )

Г— ВҜОұj (l, ПҶ, dt ) for B вҠҶ Xj (which combines (61) and (63)), and 2): the factorization (59). An analogous argument for a set B вҠҶ X\J gives 

P вҖІ(T вҖІ 

> k+1

вҲҲ dt, X вҖІ 

> k+1

вҲҲ B|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> k

) = K\J (LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

, t, B )ВҜ Оұ\J (LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

, dt )

Г— Y

> hвҲҲJ

U h(LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

, T вҖІ

> k

, t вҲ’)U \J (LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

, T вҖІ

> k

, t вҲ’)= Оұ(LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

, dt Г— B)U (LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

, T вҖІ

> k

, t вҲ’),

where we used that Оұ(l, ПҶ, dt Г—B) = K\J (l, ПҶ, t, B )ВҜ Оұ\J (l, ПҶ, dt ) for B вҠҶ X\J (which combines (61) and (64)). The result for general B вҲҲ X follows: By decomposing 

B into Bj = B вҲ© Xj and B\J = B вҲ© X\J , we get pairwise disjoint subsets, and the result is obtained by combining the previous results with the additivity of the measures involved. This verifies (68). We conclude that Оұ is the canonical compensator of N вҖІ.By [26, Theorem 8.2.1], for each l вҲҲ S, there exists a probability measure PОұ(l) on the canonical space where Оұ(l) = Оұ(l, В·), and by [26, Theorem 8.2.2], P вҖІ(N вҖІ вҲҲ В·| LвҖІ =

l) = PОұ(l) for P вҖІ в—Ұ LвҖІвҲ’ 1-a.e. l. The same theorems give P (N вҲҲ В·| L = l) = PОұ(l)

for P в—Ұ LвҲ’1-a.e. l. Since by assumption P вҖІ(LвҖІ вҲҲ В· ) = P (L вҲҲ В· ), it follows from the disintegration theorem that P вҖІ(( N вҖІ, L вҖІ) вҲҲ В· ) = P (( N, L ) вҲҲ В· ). We now show that Лң Оұ is the canonical compensator of ЛңN вҖІ under P вҖІ with respect to the filtration { ЛңFвҖІ 

> t

}t generated by LвҖІ and ЛңN вҖІ. As with the observed process, it suffices to prove 

P вҖІ( ЛңT вҖІ 

> k+1

> t | ЛңFвҖІ 

> ЛңTвҖІ
> k

) = ЛңU (LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ| ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, t )(71) 

P вҖІ( ЛңT вҖІ 

> k+1

вҲҲ dt, ЛңXвҖІ 

> k+1

вҲҲ dx | ЛңFвҖІ 

> ЛңTвҖІ
> k

) = ЛңU (LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ| ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, t вҲ’)Лң Оұ(LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ| ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, dt Г— dx ).(72) First, Algorithm 1 defines each T jk+1 deterministically from the intervention nj and the history LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ| ЛңT вҖІ

> k

. Because ЛңFвҖІ 

> ЛңTвҖІ
> k

= Пғ(LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

), e.g. [26, Theorem 2.2.14], T jk+1 

is ЛңFвҖІ 

> ЛңTвҖІ
> k

-measurable, and 

U j (LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ| ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, t ) = P  

> ЛңTвҖІ
> k<u вүӨt

 1 вҲ’ ВҜnj (LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ| ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, du ) = I(T jk+1 > t ).(73) 

> 47

To establish (71), set G = Пғ( ЛңFвҖІ 

> ЛңTвҖІ
> k

, I Ck+1 ). By the assignments in Algorithm 1 we get 

P вҖІ( ЛңT вҖІ 

> k+1

> t |G ) = P вҖІ

вҲ§jвҲҲJ T jk+1 вҲ§ T \Jk+1 > t G



ICk+1 + P вҖІ( ЛңT вҲ— 

> k+1

> t |G )ICck+1 .

(74) Consider now the first term on the right-hand side of (74). Because each T jk+1 is 

G-measurable we get 

P вҖІ

вҲ§jвҲҲJ T jk+1 вҲ§ T \Jk+1 > t G



= Y

> jвҲҲJ

I(T jk+1 > t )P вҖІ(T \Jk+1 > t |G )= Y

> jвҲҲJ

U j (LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ| ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, t )P вҖІ(T \Jk+1 > t |G ),

(75) where we used (73). On Ck+1 , we have ЛңN вҖІ| ЛңT вҖІ

> k

= N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> k

by the established consistency condition. Therefore, on Ck+1 , we have by Algorithm 1 that {T \Jk+1 > t } = {U \Jt >Оҫ\Jk+1 }, with U \Jt := U \J (LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ| ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, t ). U \Jt is ЛңF ЛңT вҖІ

> k

-measurable, and therefore 

G-measurable. By Assumption (I2), Оҫ\Jk+1 is independent of Пғ LвҖІ, {Оҫjz , О· jz , Оҫ \Jz , О· \Jz , ЛңОҫz , ЛңО·z }zвүӨk,j вҲҲJ

.Since G = ЛңFвҖІ 

> ЛңTвҖІ
> k

вҲЁ Пғ(ICk+1 ) and both ЛңFвҖІ 

> ЛңTвҖІ
> k

and ICk+1 are Пғ LвҖІ, {Оҫjz , О· jz , Оҫ \Jz , О· \Jz , ЛңОҫz ,

ЛңО·z }zвүӨk,j вҲҲJ

-measurable, we get Оҫ\Jk+1 вҠҘвҠҘP вҖІ G by the decomposition property of (conditional) independence. Applying Lemma 4 with X = U \Jt , Z = Оҫ\Jk+1 , and f (x, z ) = I(x > z ), we obtain 

P вҖІ(T \Jk+1 > t |G ) = g(U \Jt ),

where g(x) = EP вҖІ [I(x > Оҫ \Jk+1 )] = x, because Оҫ\Jk+1 is uniform on [0 , 1] under P вҖІ.Thus, P вҖІ(T \Jk+1 > t |G ) = U \Jt . Substituting this into (75) gives 

P вҖІ

вҲ§jвҲҲJ T jk+1 вҲ§ T \Jk+1 > t G



=

 Y 

> jвҲҲJ

U j (LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ| ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, t )



U \J (LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ| ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, t )= ЛңU (LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ| ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, t ).

For the second term in (74) (on Cck+1 ), we similarly have { ЛңT вҲ— 

> k+1

> t } = { ЛңUt >

ЛңОҫk+1 } with ЛңUt := ЛңU (LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ| ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, ЛңT вҖІ

> k

, t ), which is G-measurable. Again by Assump-tion (I2), ЛңОҫk+1 is independent of G under P вҖІ. Applying Lemma 4 as above gives 

P вҖІ( ЛңT вҲ— 

> k+1

> t |G ) = ЛңUt. Inserting the preceding results into (74) gives 

P вҖІ( ЛңT вҖІ 

> k+1

> t |G ) = ЛңUtICk+1 + ЛңUtICck+1 = ЛңUt.

Since ЛңUt is ЛңFвҖІ 

> ЛңTвҖІ
> k

-measurable, we obtain (71) by taking conditional expectations of the preceding equation with respect to ЛңFвҖІ 

> ЛңTвҖІ
> k

.The equality (72) follows by analogous arguments, using that Лң О·k+1 is independent of G by assumption (I2), and Lemma 4. We omit the detailed computation. Once (72) is shown, it follows that Лң Оұ is the canonical compensator of ЛңN вҖІ under 

P вҖІ. The same reasoning as for the observed data MPP gives that Law P вҖІ (LвҖІ, ЛңN вҖІ) = Law P (L, ЛңN ).

> 48

Verifying the exchangeability condition (P2). 

We now verify that the claimed exchangeability condition (P2) holds. We only establish the condition for one fixed component j вҲҲ J, as the condition for the remaining components is shown with identical reasoning. We first verify that the following conditional independencies hold for each k вүҘ 1: 

T jk вҠҘвҠҘP вҖІ (T hk , T \Jk , ЛңN вҖІ)hвҲҲJ\{ j} FвҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

, П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

,(76) 

V jk вҠҘвҠҘP вҖІ (T hk , T \Jk , ЛңN вҖІ)hвҲҲJ\{ j} FвҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

вҲЁ Пғ(T jk ), П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

.(77) (76)-(77) are independencies conditioning on a Пғ-algebra A mixed with an event 

A вҲҲ A . We defined such mixed conditional independence in Appendix A.2 under the assumption that the event A has positive probability. For verifying the ex-changeability condition (P2), it suffices to establish (76)-(77) under the assumption 

P вҖІ(П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

) > 0: if {П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

} is a P вҖІ-null set, nothing needs to be shown, as can be seen from (87). We therefore assume P вҖІ(П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

) > 0 in the following derivations and understand mixed conditional independence as in (49) in Appendix A.2. To show (76), note that on {П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

}, we have T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

ЛңN вҖІ = T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

N вҖІ by the previously established consistency condition. Because T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

N вҖІ is FвҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

-measurable, [26, Theorem 2.2.14], (76) holds if we can establish the conditional independence 

T jk вҠҘвҠҘP вҖІ (T hk , T \Jk , T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

ЛңN вҖІ)hвҲҲJ\{ j}|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

, П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

,(78) where we use the notation tZ(ds Г—dx ) := I(s > t )Z(ds Г—dx ) for a random measure 

Z вҖҷstartedвҖҷ at t.To proceed we recall from (I3) that 

Оҫjk вҠҘвҠҘP вҖІ {Оҫhk }hМё=j вҲӘ { Оҫ\Jk , О· \Jk } вҲӘ { Оҫhm, Оҫ \Jm , О· hm, О· \Jm , ЛңОҫm, ЛңО·m}hвҲҲJ,m>k FвҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

.

We now use that {П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

} вҲҲ F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

(apply [26, Theorem 2.1.16 (i)] to I(П„ вҖІJ >

В·)). Since a conditional independence with respect to a Пғ-algebra A implies a corresponding conditional independence with respect to A, A , the Пғ-algebra A

mixed with an event A вҲҲ A , the preceding independence implies, since FвҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

=

Пғ(LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

), (79) 

Оҫjk вҠҘвҠҘP вҖІ {Оҫhk }hМё=j вҲӘ { Оҫ\Jk , О· \Jk } вҲӘ { Оҫhm, Оҫ \Jm , О· hm, О· \Jm , ЛңОҫm, ЛңО·m}hвҲҲJ,m>k Пғ(LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

), П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

.

The result (78) now follows from (79). This is because conditional independence statements are preserved under measurable transformations: The random vari-ables in (78) are transformations of random variables in (79), as can be seen by inspecting Algorithm 1. In particular, T jk is a function of ( LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

, Оҫ jk) while (T hk , T \Jk , T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

ЛңN вҖІ)hМё=j are functions as described in (80): On {П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

}, and thus on Ck (by the established consistency condition ( P 1)) , the variables ( T hk , T \Jk , T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

ЛңN вҖІ)hМё=j are functions of (LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

, {Оҫhk }hМё=j вҲӘ { Оҫ\Jk , О· \Jk } вҲӘ { Оҫhm, Оҫ \Jm , О· hm, О· \Jm , ЛңОҫm, ЛңО·m}hвҲҲJ,m>k ).

(80) Using these facts, we can deduce (78) from (79) using a monotone class argument. 

> 49

To show (77), it suffices (analogously to (78)) to verify the independence 

V jk вҠҘвҠҘP вҖІ (T hk , T \Jk , T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

ЛңN вҖІ)hМё=j |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

вҲЁ Пғ(T jk ), П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

.(81) Because {П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

} вҲҲ F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

, conditioning on this event in (I3) preserves the conditional independence. We get, by the same arguments as those used to deduce (79) from (I3), the independence (82) 

О·jk вҠҘвҠҘP вҖІ {Оҫhk }hМё=j вҲӘ { Оҫ\Jk , О· \Jk } вҲӘ { Оҫhm, Оҫ \Jm , О· hm, О· \Jm , ЛңОҫm, ЛңО·m}hвҲҲJ,m>k Пғ(LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

, T jk ), П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

.

The result (81) follows from (82), because conditional independence is preserved by measurable transformations. In particular, inspecting Algorithm 1, we see that V jk

is a function of ( LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

, T jk , О· jk), and ( T hk , T \Jk , T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

ЛңN вҖІ)hМё=j are as described in (80). Using that FвҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

= Пғ(LвҖІ, N вҖІ|T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

), we can conclude that (81) holds, where this deduction can formally be made using a monotone class argument. We conclude that (77) holds. We now show that the condition (P2) for the jth component is ensured by (76)-(77). Toward this end we write Ој and ОҪ for the ( P вҖІ, FвҖІ 

> t

) and ( P вҖІ, FвҖІ 

> t

вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңN вҖІ))-compensators of N вҖІj , respectively. To establish the condition, it suffices to show that 

Ој(dt Г— dx )I(П„ вҖІJ вүҘ t) = ОҪ(dt Г— dx )I(П„ вҖІJ вүҘ t) P вҖІ-a.s. The preceding equality implies that П„ вҖІJ

Ој is a compensator of П„ вҖІJ

N вҖІj with respect to both {F вҖІ 

> t

}t and {F вҖІ 

> t

вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңN вҖІ)}t under P вҖІ. Since Оұj is the canonical compensator of N вҖІj under P вҖІ, we have Ој(dt Г— dx ) = Оұj (LвҖІ, N вҖІ, dt Г— dx ) P вҖІ-a.s., and the preceding equality implies that (P2) holds for the jth component. By [26, Theorem 4.1.11] we have for each k вүҘ 1 that, P вҖІ-a.s. on {T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

< t вүӨ T вҖІ

> k

},

Ој(dt Г— dx ) = 

P вҖІ(T вҖІ 

> k

вҲҲ dt, X вҖІ 

> k

вҲҲ dx вҲ© Xj |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

)

P вҖІ(T вҖІ 

> k

вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

) ,(83) 

ОҪ(dt Г— dx ) = 

P вҖІ(T вҖІ 

> k

вҲҲ dt, X вҖІ 

> k

вҲҲ dx вҲ© Xj |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңN вҖІ)) 

P вҖІ(T вҖІ 

> k

вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңN вҖІ)) .(84) Using that I(T вҖІ 

> k

вҲҲ dt, X вҖІ 

> k

вҲҲ dx вҲ© Xj ) = I(T jk вҲҲ dt, вҲ§hвҲҲJ\{ j}T hk вүҘ t, T \Jk вүҘ t, V jk вҲҲ

dx вҲ© Xj ) P вҖІ-a.s. (by Algorithm 1 and Lemma 3), we have 

P вҖІ(T вҖІ 

> k

вҲҲ dt,X вҖІ 

> k

вҲҲ dx вҲ© Xj |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

)= P вҖІ(T jk вҲҲ dt, вҲ§hвҲҲJ\{ j}T hk вүҘ t, T \Jk вүҘ t, V jk вҲҲ dx вҲ© Xj |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

)= P вҖІ(V jk вҲҲ dx вҲ© Xj |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

, T jk = t)P вҖІ(T jk вҲҲ dt |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

)

Г— P вҖІ(вҲ§hвҲҲJ\{ j}T hk вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

)P вҖІ(T \Jk вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

),

where the last equality follows from (D1) and (D2). From (76) and the decomposition and weak union properties of conditional in-dependence, we deduce the conditional independencies 

T jk вҠҘвҠҘP вҖІ (T hk , T \Jk )hвҲҲJ\{ j}|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңN вҖІ), П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

,(85) 

T jk вҠҘвҠҘP вҖІ ЛңN вҖІ|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

, П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

.(86) 

> 50

Using these independencies we get, P вҖІ-a.s. on {П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

},

P вҖІ(T вҖІ 

> k

вҲҲ dt, X вҖІ 

> k

вҲҲ dx вҲ© Xj |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңN вҖІ)) = P вҖІ(T jk вҲҲ dt, вҲ§hвҲҲJ\{ j}T hk вүҘ t, T \Jk вүҘ t, V jk вҲҲ dx вҲ© Xj |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңN вҖІ)) = P вҖІ(V jk вҲҲ dx вҲ© Xj |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңN вҖІ), T jk = t, вҲ§hвҲҲJ\{ j}T hk вүҘ t, T \Jk вүҘ t)

Г— P вҖІ(T jk вҲҲ dt, вҲ§hвҲҲJ\{ j}T hk вүҘ t, T \Jk вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңN вҖІ)) = P вҖІ(V jk вҲҲ dx вҲ© Xj |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

, T jk = t)

Г— P вҖІ(T jk вҲҲ dt |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

)P вҖІ(вҲ§hвҲҲJ\{ j}T hk вүҘ t, T \Jk вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңN вҖІ)) ,

where we used (77), (85), and (86) in the last line. For the denominators on the right-hand side of (83)-(84) we similarly get, by (D1) and (85)-(86), P вҖІ-a.s., 

P вҖІ(T вҖІ 

> k

вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

) = P вҖІ(T jk вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

)P вҖІ(вҲ§hвҲҲJ\{ j}T hk вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

)P вҖІ(T \Jk вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

)

P вҖІ(T вҖІ 

> k

вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңN вҖІ)) I(П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

)= P вҖІ(T jk вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

)P вҖІ(вҲ§hвҲҲJ\{ j}T hk вүҘ t, T \Jk вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңN вҖІ)) I(П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

).

Substituting the preceding expressions into (83) and (84), we obtain for each k вүҘ 1that 

Ој(dt Г— dx )I(T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

< t вүӨ T вҖІ

> k

, П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

)=

P вҖІ(V jk вҲҲ dx вҲ© Xj |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

, T jk = t)P вҖІ(T jk вҲҲ dt |F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

)

P вҖІ(T jk вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

) I(T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

< t вүӨ T вҖІ

> k

, П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

)= ОҪ(dt Г— dx )I(T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

< t вүӨ T вҖІ

> k

, П„ вҖІJ > T вҖІ

> kвҲ’1

),

(87) since the terms P вҖІ(вҲ§hвҲҲJ\{ j}T hk вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

)P вҖІ(T \Jk вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

) and P вҖІ(вҲ§hвҲҲJ\{ j}T hk вүҘ

t, T \Jk вүҘ t|F вҖІ 

> TвҖІ
> kвҲ’1

вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңN вҖІ)) cancel out from the respective numerator and denomina-tor. We thus get from (87) by summing over k that, P вҖІ-a.s., 

Ој(dt Г— dx )I(П„ вҖІJ вүҘ t) = X

> kвүҘ1

Ој(dt Г— dx )I(T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

< t вүӨ T вҖІ

> k

)I(П„ вҖІJ вүҘ t)= X

> kвүҘ1

ОҪ(dt Г— dx )I(T вҖІ 

> kвҲ’1

< t вүӨ T вҖІ

> k

)I(П„ вҖІJ вүҘ t)= ОҪ(dt Г— dx )I(П„ вҖІJ вүҘ t).

в–Ў

Appendix C. Characterizing potential outcomes in the general MPP setting, allowing for unmeasured components 

This appendix characterizes potential outcome processes under multiple inter-ventions in the general MPP setting. The construction tackles the situation with both observed and unmeasured components. We also allow here for interventions that are optional, but not predictable. 

> 51

We let B be a set indexing all MPP components (both observed and unmea-sured), and write N = ( N j )jвҲҲB for the full MPP. Write X for the mark set of N .In addition to N we also consider baseline random elements L, U . The observed components consist of a subset of these elements: the baseline variable L, and the processes N j for j вҲҲ I d вҠӮ B. The unmeasured, or вҖҷhiddenвҖҷ, components are U

and components of N are indexed by B \ I d. This set-up generalizes the one in Section 9.1, which is recovered when B = Id and U is omitted (i.e., when there are no unmeasured components). We consider interventions on a subset J вҠҶ I d of the observed components. Each intervention nj is a counting measure on the canonical space ( S Г— U Г— N X 

> T

, S вҠ— 

U вҠ— H X 

> T

) satisfying 

nj (l, u, ПҶ, dt Г— dx ) = nj (l, u, ПҶ |t, dt Г— dx )for all ( l, u, ПҶ ) вҲҲ S Г—U Г—N X 

> T

and t вҲҲ [0 , T ]. Following [26], we call a kernel with this property optional . We assume that ( N X 

> T

, HX 

> T

) is Borel to ensure the existence of certain disintegrations. To reflect that an intervention can only depend on observed components, we take nj to be constant in u and in any unobserved components of 

ПҶ. We use the notation N j := nj (L, U, N, В·) for the intervention nj evaluated in the observed (and unmeasured) trajectories. Let Оұ = ( Оұj )jвҲҲB denote the canonical compensator of N = ( N j )jвҲҲB , and ЛҷL j

the canonical compensator of N j for j вҲҲ J with respect to P and the filtration generated by ( L, U, N ). ЛҷL j is a dual predictable projection on the canonical space, and exists by analogous arguments as those shown in the proof of [26, Theorem 4.2.2]. These canonical compensators are functionals on the path space of ( L, U, N ). In particular, L j := ЛҷL j (L, U, N ) defines a compensator of N j with respect to the filtration generated by ( L, U, N ). We characterize the potential outcome process via its canonical compensator. For the characterization to be meaningful, we adopt regularity conditions analogous to those in Section 4.2 to ensure this canonical compensator is well-defined (see [26, Theorem 4.2.2 and Section 4.3]): 

n X 

> jвҲҲJ

d ВҜЛҷL jt (l, u, ПҶ ) + X

> jвҲҲB\J

dВҜОұjt (l, u, ПҶ )

o

I(ПҖвҖІвҲһ(l, u, ПҶ ) < t ) = 0 ,(88) 

X

> jвҲҲJ

вҲҶ ВҜЛҷL jt (l, u, ПҶ ) + X

> jвҲҲB\J

вҲҶВҜ Оұjt (l, u, ПҶ ) вүӨ 1,(89) where ПҖвҖІвҲһ(l, u, ПҶ ) = inf s > 0| P

> jвҲҲJ

ВҜЛҷL js (l, u, ПҶ ) + P 

> jвҲҲB\J

ВҜОұjs(l, u, ПҶ ) = вҲһ , and we recall the convention that for a random measure Ој operating on a mark set XОј,ВҜОјt = Ој((0 , t ] Г— XОј). Write ЛңF[0 ,T ] for the filtration generated by ( L, U, ЛңN ). The potential outcome process ЛңN under the joint intervention on components indexed by J вҠҶ I d is char-acterized through its (canonical) compensator as follows: ЛҷL j (L, U, ЛңN ) defines a ( P, ЛңF[0 ,T ])-compensator of ЛңN j for j вҲҲ J, Оұj (L, U, ЛңN ) defines a ( P, ЛңFT )-compensator of ЛңN j for j вҲҲ B \ J. 

(90) If nj is predictable, then, analogously to Definition 2, we have ЛҷL j (L, U, ЛңN ) = 

nj (L, U, ЛңN ) P -a.s. Furthermore, by similar arguments to those shown in Appendix D.2, it follows from (90) that ЛңN j = nj (L, U, ЛңN ) P -a.s., analogously to (5). 

> 52

Appendix D. Supporting lemmas and technical results 

Lemma 4 (Conditional expectation under independence) . ([61, Theorem 9.10]) Let G be a Пғ-algebra, X a G-measurable random variable, and Z independent of G.Then, for any bounded measurable function fEf (X, Z )|G  = g(X) a.s. ,

where g(x) = E[f (x, Z )]. 

Lemma 5. Recall the processes Na, Оӣa, and Ma introduced in Section 4.5. We have 

Na = П„ a

N a + П„ a

na(N ) вҲ’ 2 П„ a

[N a, na(N )] ,(91) 

Оӣa = П„ a

Оӣa + П„ a

na(N ) вҲ’ 2

Z П„ aвҲ§В· 

> 0

вҲҶnas (N )dОӣas P -a.s. (92) 

Ma =

Z П„ aвҲ§В· 

> 0

 1 вҲ’ 2вҲҶ nas (N )dM as P -a.s. (93) Moreover, the exchangeability condition (13) is equivalent to  

> П„a

Оӣa defines a compensator of П„ a

N a

with respect to both F[0 ,T ] and F ЛңY  

> [0 ,T ]

under P. 

(94) 

Proof. We first highlight that N a вҲ’ [N a, na(N )] counts the jumps of N a which are not shared with jumps of na(N ), and similarly that na(N ) вҲ’ [N a, na(N )] counts the jumps of na(N ) which are not shared with jumps of N a. The identity (91) reflects that Nat counts whether there are jumps of N a which are not shared with jumps of 

na(N ), or jumps of na(N ) which are not shared with jumps of N a, up to time t.We also have  

> П„a

[N a, na(N )] = 

Z П„ aвҲ§В· 

> 0

вҲҶnas (N )dN as .

Since na(N ) is F[0 ,T ]-predictable and Оӣ a defines an F[0 ,T ]-compensator of N a, it fol-lows that R П„ aвҲ§В·  

> 0

вҲҶnas (N )dОӣas defines a compensator of П„ a

[N a, na(N )] with respect to 

P and F[0 ,T ] (see, e.g., [5, Theorem 8.2.9]). Next, as na(N ) is an F[0 ,T ]-predictable counting process, П„ a

na(N ) defines a compensator of itself with respect to P and 

F[0 ,T ]. By combining these facts with (91) we get the results (92) and (93) by the uniqueness of compensators. Assume now the exchangeability condition (13) holds. The right-hand side of (93) is a martingale with respect to the two filtrations F[0 ,T ] and F ЛңY 

> [0 ,T ]

, because Ma

is a martingale with respect to both these filtrations and na(N ) is F[0 ,T ]-predictable. By integrating with respect to bounded and predictable functions, it follows that  

> П„a

M a is a martingale with respect to both filtrations. Since П„ a

Оӣa is predictable with respect to both filtrations, (94) follows. Conversely, if П„ a

Оӣa is the compensator of П„ a

N a with respect to both F[0 ,T ] and 

F ЛңY 

> [0 ,T ]

, then П„ a

M a is a local martingale with respect to both filtrations. Using the representation Ma = R П„ aвҲ§В·  

> 0

(1 вҲ’2вҲҶ nas (N )) dM as from (93), we get by integrating with respect to bounded and predictable functions that Ma is a martingale with respect to both filtrations. Since Оӣa is F[0 ,T ]-predictable, the condition (13) follows. в–Ў

> 53

Lemma 6. If W in (11) is a likelihood ratio process, then П„ a = вҲһ Q-a.s., where 

Q is the induced measure dQ = WT dP on FT .

Proof. The event {П„ a < вҲһ} is contained in FП„ a . Since W is a uniformly integrable martingale we get 

Q(П„ a < вҲһ) = EP [WT I(П„ a < вҲһ)] = EP [WП„ a I(П„ a < вҲһ)] = 0 ,

since WП„ a = 0 P -a.s. on {П„ a < вҲһ} by Lemma 7. в–Ў

Lemma 7. Condition (9) (Positivity) implies the following: i) { 11вҲ’вҲҶОӣas

}s is locally bounded. ii) Ka in (10) is a local square integrable martingale of finite variation with respect to P and F[0 ,T ].iii) W = E(Ka) in (11) is of finite variation, and is a nonnegative local martin-gale with respect to P and F[0 ,T ].iv) П„ a in (8) coincides with the optional times П„ aвҖІ = inf {s > 0|вҲҶKas = вҲ’1} and 

П„ aвҖІвҖІ = inf {s > 0|Ws = 0 }.v) I(WВ· > 0) = I(В· < П„ a) P -a.s. vi) вҹЁM j , W вҹ©P and вҹЁM j , Kaвҹ©P exist with respect to F[0 ,T ] for each j вҲҲ I d. Fur-thermore вҹЁM j , Kaвҹ©P = вҲ’ R В·

> 011вҲ’вҲҶОӣas

dвҹЁM j , Maвҹ©Ps and вҹЁM j , W вҹ©P = R В· 

> 0

WsвҲ’

dвҹЁM j , Kaвҹ©Ps .If the exchangeability condition in Definition 3 (ii) also holds, then: vii) ii) and iii) also holds with respect to P and F ЛңY 

> [0 ,T ]

.

Proof. i): The process Оҫ := R В·

> 0
> dОӣas
> 1вҲ’вҲҶОӣas

is cadlag and predictable. This can be seen by decomposing the integral as 

Оҫ = Оӣa,c + X

> 0<s вүӨВ·

вҲҶОӣas

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

.

where Оӣa,c (dt ) = I(вҲҶ Оӣas = 0) Оӣa(dt ) is the continuous part of Оӣa. The process on the right-hand side of the previous line is cadlag, and predictable as it is a sum of predictable terms. Under (9), Оҫ takes values in R on [0 , T ], i.e. Оҫ does not explode to вҲһ on [0 , T ]. If the condition were not satisfied, Оҫ would evidently fail to be locally bounded. However, since Оҫ is cadlag, predictable, and real-valued, it is locally bounded by [5, Lemma 7.3.20]. We can thus pick a localizing sequence {Пғn}n, i.e. Пғn are optional times in-creasing up to вҲһ so that I(Пғn > 0) ОҫПғnвҲ§В· вүӨ cn for some constant cn for each n. It certainly follows that 

I(Пғn > 0)вҲҶ ОҫПғnвҲ§В· = I(Пғn > 0) вҲҶОӣaПғnвҲ§В· 

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣaПғnвҲ§В· 

вүӨ cn.

for each n. We can conclude from this that 

I(Пғn > 0) 11 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣaПғnвҲ§В· 

вүӨ cn + 1 ,

for each n вүҘ 1. That is, { 11вҲ’вҲҶОӣas

}s is locally bounded. ii): 

> 54

Since Ma is a martingale, we have by i) and [33, IV 2 Theorem 29] that Ka =

вҲ’ R В·

> 0
> dMas
> 1вҲ’вҲҶОӣas

is a local martingale. It is of finite variation since the integrator is of finite variation and the integrand is locally bounded. We show that it is also a local square integrable martingale. Ma is the difference between a one-jump counting process Na and its compensator Оӣa, a cadlag and pre-dictable process. Na is automatically locally bounded, while Оӣa is locally bounded by [5, Lemma 7.3.20], making Ma a locally bounded martingale. It is therefore in particular a local square integrable martingale. Moreover, by [33, II 6 Corollary 2], there is a local martingale ЛңM such that ( Ma)2 = ЛңM + [ Ma]. Since Ma is a local square integrable martingale, it follows that [ Ma] is locally integrable. By definition of the quadratic variation (see Appendix A) and [33, IV 2 Theorem 22], we get 

Ka2 = 2 

Z В·

> 0

KasвҲ’dKas +

Z В·

> 0

1(1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas )2 d[Ma]s.(95) The integrand in the first term of the right-hand side of (95) is the left-limit of a cadlag and adapted process. Thus, it is predictable, and Sn = inf {s > 0|| Kas | вүҘ n}

defines a sequence of optional times increasing up to вҲһ making Ka 

> вҲ’

locally bounded. Moreover, the integrator is a local martingale. Combining localizing sequences, the first term on the right-hand side of (95) is a local martingale by [33, IV 2 Theorem 29]. The integrand in the second term on the right-hand side of (95) is locally bounded by i), and the integrator is locally integrable. Combining localizing sequences, stopping, taking expectations, and suprema, we conclude that Ka is a local square integrable martingale. iii): Equation (11) implies that 

V[0 ,t ](W ) вүӨ 1 + 

Z t

> 0

V[0 ,s )(W )dV [0 ,s ](Ka),

where V[0 ,t ](Z) is the variation of a process Z up to t. Since Ka is of finite variation, it follows from GrВЁ onwallвҖҷs inequality, e.g. [5, Lemma 15.1.6], that W is of finite variation. Next, since 0 вүӨ вҲҶОӣa вүӨ 1, вҲҶ Ka = вҲ’ вҲҶNaвҲ’вҲҶОӣa 

> 1вҲ’вҲҶОӣa

вүҘ вҲ’ 1 is immediate, where the only ambiguity is the case вҖқ 00 вҖқ. The proof of iv) shows that this ambiguity occurs on an exceptional set; thus вҲҶ Ka вүҘ вҲ’ 1 P -a.s. Since Ka is a local martingale and W =

E(Ka), we get from [5, Lemma 15.3.2.] that W is a nonnegative local martingale with respect to P and F[0 ,T ].iv): The equality вҲҶ Ka = вҲ’ вҲҶNaвҲ’вҲҶОӣa 

> 1вҲ’вҲҶОӣa

= вҲ’1 holds only when вҲҶ Na = 1, provided that вҲҶОӣaМё = 1. Under condition (9), we have in particular have that вҲҶ ОӣaП„ aМё = 1 P -a.s. on {П„ a < вҲһ} . It follows that вҲҶ KaП„ a = вҲ’1 P -a.s. on {П„ a < вҲһ} , and therefore that 

П„ a = inf {s > 0|вҲҶKas = вҲ’1} P -a.s. The other identity can be seen from the solution of the stochastic exponential; see [33, II 8 Theorem 37]. v): Inspecting the solution of the stochastic exponential, [33, II 8 Theorem 37], this follows from iv). vi): 

> 55

Ka is a local square integrable martingale by ii). Moreover, under Assumption 1, M j , is a finite variation local square integrable martingale; see [2, Chapter II]. Thus, [ Ka, M j ] is via the Kunita-Watanabe inequality, [33, II 6 Theorem 25], locally integrable, and its compensator with respect to P and F[0 ,T ], вҹЁKa, M j вҹ©P , exists. Moreover, by [33, IV 2 Theorem 22] we have [ Ka, M j ] = вҲ’ R В·  

> 0
> d[Ma,M j]s
> 1вҲ’вҲҶОӣas

. Since the integrand of this equation is locally bounded (by i)) and predictable, and the compensator of [ Ma, M j ] is вҹЁMa, M j вҹ©P , it follows that вҹЁKa, M j вҹ©P = вҲ’ R В·  

> 0
> dвҹЁMa,M jвҹ©Ps
> 1вҲ’вҲҶОӣas

by e.g. [5, Theorem 8.2.9]. Next, [W, M j ] = 

Z В·

> 0

WsвҲ’d[Ka, M j ]s(96) by (11) and [33, IV 2 Theorem 22]. Since W is a cadlag and adapted process of finite variation, WвҲ’ is predictable, and locally bounded (see the proof of ii)). Since 

Ka and M j are local square integrable martingales and WвҲ’ is locally bounded, it follows from (96) that [ W, M j ] is of locally integrable variation by combining localizing sequences. This means that вҹЁW, M j вҹ©P exists. Since WвҲ’ is predictable and locally bounded, it follows from (96) that вҹЁW, M j вҹ©P = R В· 

> 0

WsвҲ’dвҹЁKa, M j вҹ©Ps .vii): Since Оӣa also defines a ( P, F ЛңY 

> [0 ,T ]

)-compensator of Na under exchangeability, the result follows by applying the arguments shown in the proofs of ii) and iii) to F ЛңY 

> [0 ,T ]

instead of F[0 ,T ]. в–Ў

By Lemma 7, W in (11) is a nonnegative local P -martingale with respect to 

F[0 ,T ], and if exchangeability holds, this is also true with respect to the filtration 

F ЛңY 

> [0 ,T ]

. In the following lemma we use the general notation Z[0 ,T ] for a filtration on [0 , T ], where we take Z[0 ,T ] = F ЛңY  

> [0 ,T ]

if exchangeability holds and Z[0 ,T ] = F[0 ,T ]

otherwise. 

Lemma 8. Under (9), W in (11) is a nonnegative mean one uniformly integrable martingale with respect to P and Z[0 ,T ] on [0 , T ] if and only if Definition 3 (iii) holds. 

Proof. W is a nonnegative local martingale under P and Z[0 ,T ] by Lemma 7, where we can take Z[0 ,T ] = F ЛңY  

> [0 ,T ]

under exchangeability and Z[0 ,T ] = F[0 ,T ] in general. [5, Lemma 15.3.2.] says that W = E(Ka) is a martingale on [0 , T ] with respect to 

P and Z[0 ,T ] if and only if (14) holds. Thus, under (14), W is a nonnegative mean one martingale. It is uniformly integrable if and only if lim  

> bвҶ’вҲһ

sup  

> tвҲҲ[0 ,T ]

EP [I(Wt > b )Wt] = 0 .

A uniformly integrable martingale is certainly a martingale. Moreover, a martin-gale on the compact time domain [0 , T ] is uniformly integrable. This can be seen, because WT is (by (14)) integrable, and Wt = EP [WT |F t] by the martingale prop-erty. The collection {EP [Z|G t]}t is always uniformly integrable for an integrable random variable Z and a filtration {G t}t; see e.g. [61, Chapter 13.4]. в–Ў

> 56

Lemma 9. With the set-up and notation in Section 9, suppose that for each j вҲҲ J,the ( P, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of П„ J

N j is also a ( P, F ЛңY 

> [0 ,T ]

)-compensator of П„ J

N j .

(97) Then the ( P, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of NJ is also a ( P, F ЛңY 

> [0 ,T ]

)-compensator of NJ ; i.e., the exchangeability condition Theorem 3 (ii) holds. 

Proof. We prove the result assuming one intervention, i.e., J = {j}. The case when 

|J| > 1 is shown with analogous arguments at the expense of a higher notational burden. Recall that we in Section 9 assume that the mark set Xj is finite for each 

j вҲҲ J. Let {xjk}k be an enumeration of Xj which is also a partition of Xj (i.e. 

xjk = xjв„“ =вҮ’ k = в„“). Define, for each k вүҘ 1, 

П„ j,k := inf {s > 0|N j,k sМё = N j,k s },

Nj,k t := I(П„ j,k вүӨ t),

where N j,k t := N j ((0 , t ] Г— { xjk}) and N j,k t := nj (L, N, (0 , t ] Г— { xjk}). Each process 

N j,k is F[0 ,T ]-predictable because the intervention nj is predictable. Define П„ (1) := П„ j, 1, N(1)  

> t

:= Nj, 1 

> t

, and for n вүҘ 1

П„ (n+1) := П„ (n) вҲ§ П„ j,n +1 , N(n+1)  

> t

:= I(П„ (n+1) вүӨ t).

We make use of the basic identity 

N(n+1)  

> t

= I(П„ (n+1) вүӨ t) = I(П„ (n) вҲ§ П„ j,n +1 вүӨ t)= П„ (n+1) 

N(n) 

> t

+ Nj,n +1  

> t

вҲ’ [N(n), Nj,n +1 ]t



,

(98) and the representation 

Nj,k = П„ j,k 

N j,k + П„ j,k 

N j,k вҲ’ 2

Z П„ j,k вҲ§В· 

> 0

вҲҶN j,k s dN j,k s .(99) (99) can be verified using arguments similar to those used in Lemma 5 (compare (99) with (91)). Combining (98)-(99), and using that [ Nj,n +1 , N(n)] = R t 

> 0

вҲҶNj,n +1  

> s

dN(n)

> s

and П„ j,n +1 вүҘ П„ (n+1) , we obtain the recursive system 

N(n+1)  

> t

= П„ (n+1) 

Nj,n +1 

> t

+

Z tвҲ§П„ (n+1) 

> 0

 1 вҲ’ вҲҶN j,n +1  

> s

вҲ’ вҲҶN j,n +1  

> s

+ 2вҲҶ N j,n +1  

> s

вҲҶN j,n +1 

> s

dN(n) 

> s

,

(100) 

N(1)  

> t

=

Z tвҲ§П„ j, 1

> 0

(1 вҲ’ 2вҲҶ N j, 1 

> s

)dN j, 1 

> s

+ П„ j, 1

N j, 1 

> t

.(101) Using (100) and (101), we will show that, for each n вүҘ 1, there are bounded and 

F[0 ,T ]-predictable processes {An,k }kвүӨn such that  

> П„J

N(n) 

> t

=

> n

X

> k=1

 Z tвҲ§П„ J

> 0

An,k s dN j,k s + П„ J

N j,k t



.(102) 

> 57

(102) expresses П„ J

N(n) as a sum of terms that are either F[0 ,T ]-predictable, or inte-grals of bounded and F[0 ,T ]-predictable processes against П„ J

N j,k . By Assumption (97), each П„ J

N j,k has the same compensator with respect to both F[0 ,T ] and F ЛңY 

> [0 ,T ]

under P . A standard result on stochastic integrals (see, e.g., [5, Theorem 8.2.9]) then implies that, if a process Z is the integral of a bounded and F[0 ,T ]-predictable process against П„ J

N j,k , then Z has the same compensator with respect to the two filtrations under P . Moreover, each N j,k is F[0 ,T ]-predictable, and therefore its own compensator with respect to both filtrations. It follows that, if (102) holds, then П„ J

N(n) has the same compensator with respect to both filtrations for each n.Since П„ (n) вҶ“ П„ J and I(П„ J вүӨ t) = NJt , it follows that П„ J

NJ = NJ has the same com-pensator with respect to P and both filtrations. Thus, proving the lemma reduces to establishing (102). We proceed by induction. First, we see that the base case n = 1 in (101) stopped at П„ J has the desired representation with A1,1 

> s

= 1 вҲ’ 2вҲҶ N j, 1 

> s

. That is, (102) holds for n = 1. Assume now that (102) holds for some n > 1, and consider (100). First, by stopping (99) at П„ J we get  

> П„J

Nj,n +1  

> t

=

Z tвҲ§П„ J

> 0

(1 вҲ’ 2вҲҶ N j,n +1  

> s

)dN j,n +1  

> s

+ П„ J

N j,n +1  

> t

,

which equals the first term on the right-hand side of (100) stopped at П„ J . Next, inserting the induction hypothesis into the second term on the right-hand side of (100), and stopping at П„ J , we get 

Z tвҲ§П„ J

> 0

(1 вҲ’ вҲҶN j,n +1  

> s

вҲ’ вҲҶN j,n +1  

> s

+ 2вҲҶ N j,n +1  

> s

вҲҶN j,n +1  

> s

)dN(n)

> s

=

> n

X

> k=1

Z tвҲ§П„ J

> 0

(1 вҲ’ вҲҶN j,n +1  

> s

вҲ’ вҲҶN j,n +1  

> s

+ 2вҲҶ N j,n +1  

> s

вҲҶN j,n +1  

> s

)An,k s dN j,k s

+

> n

X

> k=1

Z tвҲ§П„ J

> 0

(1 вҲ’ вҲҶN j,n +1  

> s

вҲ’ вҲҶN j,n +1  

> s

+ 2вҲҶ N j,n +1  

> s

вҲҶN j,n +1  

> s

)dN j,k s

> (вӢҶ)

=

> n

X

> k=1

Z tвҲ§П„ J

> 0

(1 вҲ’ вҲҶN j,n +1  

> s

)An,k s dN j,k s

+

> n

X

> k=1

Z tвҲ§П„ J

> 0

(1 вҲ’ вҲҶN j,n +1  

> s

)dN j,k s

=

> n

X

> k=1

Z tвҲ§П„ J

> 0

(1 вҲ’ вҲҶN j,n +1  

> s

)An,k s dN j,k s

+

> n

X 

> k=1
> П„J

N j,k t вҲ’

Z tвҲ§П„ J

> 0
> n

X

> k=1

вҲҶN j,k s dN j,n +1  

> s

.

In ( вӢҶ) we used that вҲҶ N j,k s вҲҶN j,в„“ s = вҲҶ N j,k s вҲҶN j,в„“ s = 0 whenever kМё = в„“. This holds because N j,k and N j,в„“ (resp. N j,k and N j,в„“ ) count jumps of distinct marks of the same MPP N j (resp. N j := nj (L, N )) and they therefore have no common jumps. 

> 58

Combining the previous two equations, we obtain  

> П„J

N(n+1)  

> t

=

Z tвҲ§П„ J

> 0

(1 вҲ’ 2вҲҶ N j,n +1  

> s

)dN j,n +1  

> s

+ П„ J

N j,n +1 

> t

+

> n

X

> k=1

Z tвҲ§П„ J

> 0

(1 вҲ’ вҲҶN j,n +1  

> s

)An,k s dN j,k s

+

> n

X 

> k=1
> П„J

N j,k t вҲ’

Z tвҲ§П„ J

> 0
> n

X

> k=1

вҲҶN j,k s dN j,n +1 

> s

=

> n+1

X

> k=1

 Z tвҲ§П„ J

> 0

An+1 ,k s dN j,k s + П„ J

N j,k t



,

where we in the last line defined 

An+1 ,k s := (1 вҲ’ вҲҶN j,n +1  

> s

)An,k s for k вүӨ n, An+1 ,n +1  

> s

:= 1 вҲ’ 2вҲҶ N j,n +1  

> s

вҲ’

> n

X

> k=1

вҲҶN j,k s ,

(103) with the base case A1,1 

> s

= 1 вҲ’ 2вҲҶ N j, 1 

> s

. Each An+1 ,k in (103) has an explicit solu-tion involving products and sums of processes in {вҲҶN j,в„“ }1вүӨв„“вүӨn+1 ; consequently, each An+1 ,k is F[0 ,T ]-predictable. Moreover, since at most one of the processes in {N j,в„“ }1вүӨв„“вүӨn+1 can jump at any given time, each An+1 ,k is also bounded. We conclude that (102) holds for n + 1. в–Ў

D.1. The invariance property (IP). Recall that we denote the ( P, F[0 ,T ])- com-pensator of N j by Оӣ j . Consider another probability measure QвҲ— вүӘ P on FT that satisfies (IP) with respect to some Оӣ a, вҲ—. That is: 

вҖў For jМё = a, the ( QвҲ—, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N j is Оӣ j (i.e., is unchanged from 

P ); 

вҖў The ( QвҲ—, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N a is Оӣ a, вҲ— (i.e. is modified from P ). We here characterize the associated likelihood ratio process W вҲ— 

> t

:= dQ вҲ— 

> dP Ft

.By [26, Theorem 10.2.2], W вҲ— solves the SDE 

W вҲ— 

> t

= W вҲ— 

> 0

+

> d

X

> i=1

Z t

> 0

W вҲ—

> sвҲ’

V is dM is,

where V it = Оҫ(t, i ) вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣ at вҲ’вҲҶОӣ a, вҲ— 

> t
> 1вҲ’вҲҶ ВҜОӣt

and W вҲ— 

> 0

= 1. With the given distributions P

and QвҲ— we have Оҫ(t, a ) = dОӣa, вҲ—

> t
> dОӣat

while Оҫ(t, i ) = 1 for iМё = a, so 

V it =

 dОӣa, вҲ—

> t

dОӣat

вҲ’ 1



I(i = a) вҲ’ вҲҶОӣ at вҲ’ вҲҶОӣ a, вҲ—

> t

1 вҲ’ вҲҶВҜОӣt

.

Since W вҲ— 

> 0

= 1, the likelihood-ratio process solves 

W вҲ— 

> t

= 1 вҲ’ X

> iМё=a

Z t

> 0

W вҲ—

> sвҲ’

вҲҶОӣ as вҲ’ вҲҶОӣ a, вҲ—

> s

1 вҲ’ вҲҶВҜОӣs

dM is

+

Z t

> 0

W вҲ—

> sвҲ’

 dОӣa, вҲ—

> s

dОӣas

вҲ’ 1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣ as вҲ’ вҲҶОӣ a, вҲ—

> s

1 вҲ’ вҲҶВҜОӣs



dM as .

(104) 

> 59

D.1.1. An example of a distribution satisfying (IP) which is not a g-formula distri-bution. Suppose the ( P, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N jt is Оӣ jt = t for each j. Consider the process in (104) with Оӣ вҲ—,a t = ct for some deterministic c > 0. In this case, (104) reduces to 

W вҲ— 

> t

= 1 вҲ’

Z t

> 0

(c вҲ’ 1) W вҲ—

> sвҲ’

dM as .

The preceding SDE has the explicit solution W вҲ— 

> t

= cN at eвҲ’(cвҲ’1) t. N at is a Poisson process with rate 1 under P , and we therefore get by explicit expressions of moment generating functions that EP [cN at ] = EP [eN at ln (c)] = et(eln (c)вҲ’1) = et(cвҲ’1) . Thus 

EP [W вҲ— 

> t

] = 1 for each t вҲҲ [0 , T ], and W вҲ— is a mean one nonnegative uniformly integrable martingale with respect to P and F[0 ,T ]. We can therefore define the measure dQ вҲ— := W вҲ— 

> T

dP on FT , which is then going to be a probability measure. 

QвҲ— satisfies (IP) with respect to Оӣ a, вҲ— 

> t

= ct . However, there is no (deterministic) intervention na as in Definition 1 such that nat (N ) = ct .D.2. Definition 2 (a) for a predictable regime. We show first that if (5) holds, then Definition 2 (a) holds. Because na is predictable we have that na( ЛңN ) is ЛңF[0 ,T ]-predictable by [26, Corollary 2.2.8], and by (5) we get in particular that 

EP [ ЛңN a 

> ЛңП„

] = EP [na 

> ЛңП„

( ЛңN )] for each ЛңF[0 ,T ]-optional time Лң П„ . 

The preceding equality and the predictability of na( ЛңN ) implies, by the definition of compensators, that Definition 2 (a) holds. Assume now that Definition 2 (a) holds, i.e., the ( P, ЛңF[0 ,T ])-compensator of ЛңN a

is na( ЛңN ). Because na is predictable, na( ЛңN ) is a counting process that is predictable with respect to ЛңF[0 ,T ]. Defining ЛңT a 

> 0

:= 0 and ЛңT an := inf {s > 0|nas ( ЛңN ) вүҘ n},(105) it follows by [26, Theorem 2.1.30] that each ЛңT an is a predictable time with respect to ЛңF[0 ,T ]. Consequently, Лңhnt := I( ЛңT an < t < ЛңT an+1 ) defines an ЛңF[0 ,T ]-predictable process. This can be seen by noting that I( ЛңT an < t < ЛңT an+1 ) = I( ЛңT an < t )вҲ’I( ЛңT an+1 вүӨ t), where 

I( ЛңT an < t ) is left-continuous and adapted (and thus predictable), and I( ЛңT an+1 вүӨ t)is predictable by [26, Theorem 2.1.35] because ЛңT an+1 is a predictable time. By the definition of compensators, it follows that 

EP

h Z T

> 0

Лңhnt d ЛңN at

i

= EP

h Z T

> 0

Лңhnt dnat ( ЛңN )

i

= 0 ,

where we used that na( ЛңN ) is piecewise constant with jumps at { ЛңT an }n. Since the terms in the preceding expectations are non-negative, it follows that R T 

> 0

Лңhnt d ЛңN at = 0 

P -a.s. for each n. Because Лңhn вүҘ 0 and ЛңN a is non-decreasing, we obtain Лңhnt ЛңN a(dt ) = 0 P -a.s. for each n вҖ” ЛңN at is constant on the set { ЛңT an < t < ЛңT an+1 } for each n. That is, ЛңN a can only jump at the times { ЛңT an }n.Since ЛңT an is a ЛңF[0 ,T ]-predictable time and na( ЛңN ) is a compensator of ЛңN a with respect to ЛңF[0 ,T ], we have by e.g. [26, Equation (4.1.16)] that 

EP [вҲҶ ЛңN a 

> ЛңTa
> 1

| ЛңF ЛңT a 

> 1вҲ’

]I( ЛңT a 

> 1

< вҲһ) = вҲҶ na 

> ЛңTa
> 1

( ЛңN )I( ЛңT a 

> 1

< вҲһ) = I( ЛңT a 

> 1

< вҲһ) P -a.s. ,

where the last equality follows from (105). Using that ЛңT a 

> 1

вҲҲ ЛңF ЛңT a  

> 1вҲ’

(by [26, The-orem 2.2.15]) and the tower property, we get from the preceding equality that 

> 60

EP [вҲҶ ЛңN a 

> ЛңTa
> 1

I( ЛңT a 

> 1

< вҲһ)] = EP [I( ЛңT a 

> 1

< вҲһ)]. Because вҲҶ ЛңN a вүӨ 1 (since ЛңN a is a count-ing process), it follows that вҲҶ ЛңN ЛңT a

> 1

= 1 P -a.s. on { ЛңT a 

> 1

< вҲһ} . Combining this with the observation that ЛңN at = 0 on {t < ЛңT a 

> 1

}, we conclude that ЛңN a   

> ЛңTa
> 1вҲ§В·

= na  

> ЛңTa
> 1вҲ§В·

( ЛңN )

P -a.s. The identity ЛңN a   

> ЛңTanвҲ§В·

= na  

> ЛңTanвҲ§В·

( ЛңN ) P -a.s. for each n follows by induction. D.3. The equivalence of exchangeability conditions in Example 5. We show the equivalence of the exchangeability condition (ii) of Theorem 3 and (47) when there is no censoring. We use that ВҜN a is F[0 ,T ]-predictable, which holds due to the delay assumption (45). It follows from [26, Theorem 2.1.30] that, for each 

k вүҘ 1, T ak is an F[0 ,T ]-predictable time, where {T ak }k are the ordered jump times of ВҜN a = N a((0 , В·] Г— Xa). Because these times are predictable, 

hks := I(T ak < s < T ak+1 )is an F[0 ,T ]-predictable process for each k. This can be seen, as I(T ak < s < T ak+1 ) = 

I(T ak < s ) вҲ’ I(T ak+1 вүӨ s), and I(T ak < s ) is left-continuous and adapted (because 

T ak is an optional time) and thus predictable, and I(T ak+1 вүӨ t) is predictable by [26, Theorem 2.1.35]. For the intervention (46) under study, (assuming no right-censoring), regime deviation can only occur at the treatment allocation times {T ak }k, i.e. П„ a takes values in the range of {T ak }k; consequently, R T 

> 0

hks dNas = 0 P -a.s. for each k, where 

Na = I(П„ a вүӨ В· ). Since Оӣa is a compensator of Na, it thus follows from the definition of compensators and the predictability of each hk that 0 = EP

h Z T

> 0

hks dNas

i

= EP

h Z T

> 0

hks dОӣas

i

.

Since Оӣa is nondecreasing and hk вүҘ 0, it follows from the preceding line that 

hkt dОӣat = 0 P -a.s. for each k вүҘ 1. Hence, Оӣa is constant on each open interval (T ak , T ak+1 ). That is, Оӣa can only change at the times {T ak }k, P -a.s. Since these times are predictable, it follows from [26, Equation (4.1.16)] that the exchangeability condition (ii) in Theorem 3 holds if and only if 

EP

вҲҶNaT ak |F T ak вҲ’

I(T ak < вҲһ) = вҲҶ ОӣaT ak I(T ak < вҲһ)= EP

вҲҶNaT ak |F T ak вҲ’ вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңY )I(T ak < вҲһ)(106) 

P -a.s. for each k вүҘ 1. We now use the basic identity вҲҶ NaT ak

=  1 вҲ’ I(П„ a >T ak )I(П„ a вүҘ T ak ). Inserting this identity in (106) we get, after simplifying, that this equality holds if and only if 

EP

I(П„ a > T ak )|F T ak вҲ’

I(П„ a вүҘ T ak , T ak < вҲһ)= EP

I(П„ a > T ak )|F T ak вҲ’ вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңY )I(П„ a вүҘ T ak , T ak < вҲһ)

P -a.s. for each k вүҘ 1. Here we used that I(П„ a вүҘ T ak ) вҲҲ F T ak вҲ’ (apply [26, Theorem 2.1.16 (ii)] to I(П„ a вүҘ В· )) to move the indicator outside the conditional expectations. Because T ak is FT ak вҲ’-measurable (see, e.g., [16, Theorem 3.4 1)]), and I(П„ a > T ak ) = 0 on {T ak = вҲһ} , it follows that the last equality is equivalent to 

EP

I(П„ a > T ak )|F T ak вҲ’

I(П„ a вүҘ T ak ) = EP

I(П„ a > T ak )|F T ak вҲ’ вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңY )I(П„ a вүҘ T ak ).

Because I(П„ a > T ak ) = I(П„ a > T ak )I(П„ a вүҘ T ak ) and I(П„ a вүҘ T ak ) вҲҲ F T ak вҲ’, we can move the latter indicator inside the conditional expectation again and absorb it 

> 61

into I(П„ a > T ak ). It follows that the exchangeability condition Theorem 3 (ii) in this example is equivalent to any of the two following conditional independence statements: 

I(П„ a > T ak ) вҠҘвҠҘ ЛңY |F T ak вҲ’, П„ a вүҘ T ak for each k вүҘ 1,I(П„ a > T ak ) вҠҘвҠҘ ЛңY |F T ak вҲ’ for each k вүҘ 1.

D.4. Incompatibility of the exchangeability condition (13) with the strong consistency condition (17) when (16) is violated. Consider a bivariate ob-served data counting process N = ( N a, N y ) on [0 , T ] with T > 1. Assume the compensator of N under P is Оӣa(dt ) = О»aОҙ1(dt ),

Оӣy (dt ) = О»y Оҙ1(dt ),

(107) with real numbers О»a, О» y satisfying 0 < О» a, О» y < 1 and О»a + О»y вүӨ 1. The compen-sator in (107) are constant as a functional of N = ( N a, N y ). Consequently, we may take the compensator to be equal to the canonical compensator; i.e. Оұj = Оӣ j for 

j вҲҲ { a, y }, where Оұj is as in (2). In particular, from (107) it follows that вҲҶОұa 

> 1

вҲҶОұy 

> 1

= О»aО»y > 0,

which shows that the orthogonality assumption (16) is violated. Now, consider the intervention na = 0 which prevents treatment. By Definition 1, the respective compensators of the potential outcome processes ЛңN a and ЛңN y

arising under this intervention are 

na( ЛңN )( dt ) = 0 ,Оұy ( ЛңN )( dt ) = О»y Оҙ1(dt ).

(108) Suppose the potential outcome of interest is ЛңY = ЛңN y , with the associated ob-served outcome process Y = N y .For the intervention of interest ( na = 0), the regime deviation time is П„ a =inf {s > 0|N asМё = nas (N )} = inf {s > 0|N asМё = 0 }; i.e. П„ a and coincides with the first jump time of N a.Now observe from (107) that П„ a вүҘ 1. Combining this observation with the stronger consistency assumption (17), it follows that вҲҶN y 

> 1

= вҲҶ ЛңN y 

> 1

P -a.s. Moreover, the exchangeability condition (13) reduces to 

EP [вҲҶ ЛңN a 

> 1

] = EP [вҲҶ ЛңN a 

> 1

| ЛңN y |T ] P -a.s. Combining the last two equalities, and using that ЛңN y |T = вҲҶ ЛңN y 

> 1

(which follows from (108)), we get, P -a.s., 

EP [вҲҶ N a 

> 1

] = EP [вҲҶ N a 

> 1

| ЛңN y |T ] = EP [вҲҶ N a 

> 1

|вҲҶ ЛңN y 

> 1

]= EP [вҲҶ N a 

> 1

|вҲҶN y 

> 1

] = EP [вҲҶ N a 

> 1

|вҲҶN y 

> 1

= 0](1 вҲ’ вҲҶN y 

> 1

),

(109) where the last equality follows due to the no-common-jumps property вҲҶ N a 

> 1

вҲҶN y 

> 1

=0 of multivariate counting processes. Using that the compensator in (107) specifies 

> 62

the joint distribution 

P (вҲҶ N a 

> 1

= 1 , вҲҶN y 

> 1

= 1) = 0 ,P (вҲҶ N a 

> 1

= 1 , вҲҶN y 

> 1

= 0) = О»a,P (вҲҶ N a 

> 1

= 0 , вҲҶN y 

> 1

= 1) = О»y ,P (вҲҶ N a 

> 1

= 0 , вҲҶN y 

> 1

= 0) = 1 вҲ’ О»a вҲ’ О»y ,

we get 

EP [вҲҶ N a 

> 1

|вҲҶN y 

> 1

= 0] = P (вҲҶ N a 

> 1

= 1 , вҲҶN y 

> 1

= 0) 

P (вҲҶ N y 

> 1

= 0) = О»a

1 вҲ’ О»y .

Substituting the preceding equality into (109), our exchangeability condition re-quires 

О»a = О»a

1 вҲ’ О»y (1 вҲ’ вҲҶN y 

> 1

).(110) However, the equality (110) can not hold in general. For example, with О»a = 0 .3and О»y = 0 .4, the preceding statement reduces to 0.3 = 0.30.6 (1 вҲ’ вҲҶN y 

> 1

) = 0 .5(1 вҲ’ вҲҶN y 

> 1

),

which can not hold, because вҲҶ N y 

> 1

вҲҲ { 0, 1}.D.5. Testability of exchangeability assumptions. The exchangeability condi-tions presented here can be seen to be single world irrelevance conditions. Using that compensators of Na are constant on {В· > П„ a}, the statement (13) is under the consistency condition N |В·I(В· < П„ a) = ЛңN |В·I(В· < П„ a) P -a.s. equivalent to 25 

ЛҷОӣa 

> В·

( ЛңN |В·вҲ’ ) = ЛҷОҘВ·( ЛңN |В·вҲ’ , ЛңY |T ) P -a.s. ,

a statement involving functionals of realizations coming from the same intervention. As such, our conditions differ from cross-world assumptions such as those present in the NPSEM-IE model (aka structural causal model with independent errors) [32], which contain independence statements about a given unit between different coun-terfactual worlds. Such cross-world independence assumptions, generally, cannot be experimentally tested. For further discussion and some implications we refer to [34, 44, 3]. The exchangeability conditions we formulate here can in principle always be assessed indirectly using the following recipe: first, assume that exchangeability holds in a given study, and calculate effects of interest according to (15) (this means at least also assuming that positivity and consistency holds). Then, com-pare the estimated effects with estimates coming from an ideal experiment with perfect compliance conducted in the same population, where the intervention is implemented. If the difference between these estimates are statistically significant, and all other assumptions hold (which they likely do not), this would indicate that exchangeability is violated. Following [66, 34], tests of exchangeability assumptions like ours can be envis-aged if we have access to the process recording the natural value of treatment. A version of our condition involving the natural value process can be directly tested on the basis of observations coming from an ideal experiment where the regime is         

> 25 Here, ОҘ В·= ЛҷОҘВ·(N|В·вҲ’ ,ЛңY) is an FЛңY
> [0 ,T ]-compensator of Na.
> 63

implemented and the natural value process is recorded. 26 To formally employ such a condition in this work we would need to alter our definitions so as to include the natural value process. Such an altering would lead to changes throughout and is a separate work in its own right. D.6. Orthogonality of counting process martingales. If mild integrability conditions are satisfied, a counting process minus its compensator becomes a locally square integrable martingale. This means that predictable variation processes exist. Consider such a multivariate counting process N with compensator Оӣ, so that 

M = N вҲ’ Оӣ is a locally square integrable martingale. Two martingale components 

M i, M j , iМё = j, are orthogonal if their predictable variation process is zero, i.e. if 

вҹЁM i, M j вҹ© = 0 a.s. Elementary calculations with counting process martingales then gives that 27 

вҹЁM i, M j вҹ© =

Z В·

> 0

вҲҶОӣ isdОӣjs =

Z В·

> 0

вҲҶОӣ jsdОӣis = 0 P -a.s. In particular, orthogonality of the martingales holds if almost every path of each compensator process is continuous. Of particular relevance for the statistical liter-ature on counting processes is the situation when intensities exist, i.e. when there exists a non-negative and adapted process О» = ( О»1, . . . , О» d) such that Оӣ = R В· 

> 0

О»sds .A significant proportion of the existing statistical methods based on multivariate counting processes assumes that counting process intensities exist [2, 1, 11, 55, 7]. D.6.1. Practical violation of orthogonal martingales. Consider a situation where the survival status of possibly right-censored subjects only are monitored at a collection of predictable times {Пғk}k. This could correspond to a follow-up schedule which is decided in advance, or adaptively determined based on earlier recorded events, where information on the subjects is only collected at the scheduled times. The observed censoring and survival status is unknown except at the follow-up times, but each of the events generally has a non-zero chance at happening (i.e. being observed) at follow-up. Formally, there are non-negative constants {Оёk, ОІ k}k such that the compensators of the observed censoring and death processes are given by Оӣc(ds ) = X

> k

JПғk ОёkОҙПғk (ds ),

Оӣd(ds ) = X

> k

JПғk ОІkОҙПғk (ds ),

where Jt = I(N ctвҲ’ = N dtвҲ’ = 0) is the at-risk process. We have that вҲҶОӣ cПғk вҲҶОӣ dПғk =

JПғk ОёkОІk, which is positive whenever ОёkОІk > 0 and JПғk = 1 (i.e. when individuals are at risk), and the вҖҷobservedвҖҷ martingales are not orthogonal.   

> 26 For instance, we can then introduce the optional time вҖқthe first time the regime deviates from the natural value process.вҖқ An exchangeability condition for the identification of regimes as presented here can be phrased in terms of the compensator of this optional time. This optional time, and potential outcomes of interest, are observable in experiments where the intervention is implemented with perfect compliance. When these criteria are met, one can check whether the exchangeability assumption holds by e.g. fitting regression models to estimate its compensator with respect to different filtrations, and inspecting the resulting martingale residuals.
> 27 see e.g. [2, p. 75].
> 64

D.7. A proof sketch of (15) under a particular sequential exchangeability condition. We here outline an argument which gives the IPW formula (15) when the exchangeability condition (13) is swapped with the sequential condition (116), given in Proposition 5. We adopt in Proposition 5 the assumption that the event times {Tk}k are predictable. To carry out the argument we rely on alternative representations of the likelihood ratio W , expressed in terms of sums over the event times, which is established in the following lemmas. 

Lemma 10. W = E(Ka) satisfies, P -a.s. 

Wt = 1 + 

> вҲһ

X

> m=0

Z

WsвҲ’I(Tm < s вүӨ t вҲ§ Tm+1 )dKas(111) 

Wt = 1 вҲ’

> вҲһ

X

> m=0

WTm I(t > T m)



1 вҲ’ I(П„ a > t вҲ§ Tm+1 > T m)

E  вҲ’ R I(Tm < s )dОӣas



> tвҲ§Tm+1



(112) 

Proof. Using that W = 1 + R В· 

> 0

WsвҲ’dKas we get 

Wt = 1 + 

Z t

> 0

WsвҲ’dKas = 1 + 

> вҲһ

X

> m=0

Z

WsвҲ’I(Tm < s вүӨ t вҲ§ Tm+1 )dKas

by the linearity of the integral. This shows (111). Next, we show that the sum in the previous equation coincides with the sum in (112). We get that 

Z t

> 0

WsвҲ’I(Tm < s вүӨ Tm+1 )dKas = WTm

Z t

> 0

E

 Z

I(Tm < u вүӨ Tm+1 )dK u



> sвҲ’

I(Tm < s вүӨ Tm+1 )dKas

= WTm

Z t

> 0

E(Hm)sвҲ’dHms

= WTm

 1 вҲ’ E (Hm)t



where Hmt = R t 

> 0

I(Tm < s вүӨ Tm+1 )dKas . Here we used that 

E(Hm) = 1 + 

Z

E(Hm)sвҲ’dHms ,

and that 

WsвҲ’I(Tm < s вүӨ Tm+1 ) = WTm

PTm<u<s (1 вҲ’ dNau)

PTm<u<s (1 вҲ’ dОӣau) I(Tm < s вүӨ Tm+1 )= WTm E(Hm)sвҲ’I(Tm < s вүӨ Tm+1 ),

which can be seen by inspecting the calculations in the proof of Proposition 2. We can conclude that 

Wt = 1 вҲ’

> вҲһ

X

> m=0

WTm

 1 вҲ’ E (Hm)t

.

Next, we note that since Hmt = 0 on {t вүӨ Tm}, we have WTm

 1 вҲ’ E (Hm)t

 = 0 on this set and we may multiply with I(t > T m). Since we are also multiplying with WTm we are on the set {П„ a > T m}, and we can consequently assume that 

> 65

t вҲ§ П„ a > T m. This gives that, arguing as in the proof of Proposition 2, 

I(П„ a > t вҲ§ Tm+1 > T m)

E  вҲ’ R I(Tm < s вүӨ Tm+1 )dОӣas



> t

= PTm<s вүӨTm+1 вҲ§t(1 вҲ’ dNas )

PTm<s вүӨTm+1 вҲ§t(1 вҲ’ dОӣas )= 1 вҲ’

Z

I(Tm < s вүӨ Tm+1 вҲ§ t) PTm<u<s (1 вҲ’ dNau)

PTm<u<s (1 вҲ’ dОӣau)

dNas вҲ’ dОӣas

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

.

(113) The given ratio on the left-hand side of (113) coincides with E(Hm)t, as it solves the same SDE. This shows (112). в–Ў

Lemma 11. Let bounded variables H, ЛңH be such that EP [Wt ЛңH] = EP [WtH]. Then, the following are equivalent: (i) EP [ ЛңH] = EP [WtH](ii) PвҲһ 

> m=0

EP

h

WTm I(t > T m)



1 вҲ’ I(П„ a>t вҲ§Tm+1 >T m)   

> E(вҲ’RI(Tm<s )dОӣas)tвҲ§Tm+1

 ЛңH

i

= 0 (iii) PвҲһ 

> m=0

EP

h R WsвҲ’I(Tm < s вүӨ t вҲ§ Tm+1 )dKas ЛңH

i

= 0 .

Proof. Using the representation in (112) we get 

EP [Wt ЛңH] = EP [ ЛңH]

вҲ’

> вҲһ

X

> m=0

EP

"

WTm I(Tm < t ) 1 вҲ’ I(П„ a > t вҲ§ Tm+1 > T m)

E  вҲ’ R I(Tm < s )dОӣas



> tвҲ§Tm+1

!

ЛңH

#

.

By the fact that EP [WtH] = EP [Wt ЛңH] we get the first equivalence. A similar argument using the representation in (111) gives the other equivalence. в–Ў

Proposition 5. Suppose positivity and consistency as in Definition 3 holds and that ЛңYt вҠҘвҠҘ I(П„ a > T n+1 вҲ§ t > T n)

E(вҲ’ R I(Tn < s )dОӣas )Tn+1 вҲ§t

FTn , П„ a > T n(114) for each n вүҘ 1, t вҲҲ [0 , T ]. Then 

EP [ ЛңYt] = EP [WtYt].(115) If the random times {Tk}вҲһ 

> k=1

are predictable, then (115) is true under the indepen-dence condition ЛңYt вҠҘвҠҘ I(П„ a > T n+1 вҲ§ t > T n)|F Tn , П„ a > T n(116) for each n вүҘ 1, t вҲҲ [0 , T ]. 

Proof. We show the result under (116) when each random time Tk is predictable. By consistency we have that EP [WtYt] = EP [Wt ЛңYt]. Lemma 11 then says that 

EP [ ЛңYt] = EP [WtYt]if and only if 

> вҲһ

X

> m=0

EP

h

WTm I(t > T m) (1 вҲ’ Zmt ) ЛңYt

i

= 0 ,(117) where we have defined 

Zmt = I(П„ a > t вҲ§ Tm+1 > T m)

E  вҲ’ R I(Tm < s )dОӣas



> tвҲ§Tm+1

.

> 66

Since E  вҲ’ R I(Tm < s )dОӣas

 is F[0 ,T ]-predictable we have that E  вҲ’ R I(Tm <s)dОӣas



> Tm+1

is measurable with respect to FTm+1 вҲ’. Since each Tm is predictable it follows that E  вҲ’ R I(Tm < s )dОӣas



> Tm+1

is FTm -measurable. We can thus conclude that E  вҲ’ R I(Tm < s )dОӣas

 

> Tm+1 вҲ§t

is FTm -measurable. A monotone class argument then gives the implication ЛңYt вҠҘвҠҘPBm I(П„ a > T m+1 вҲ§ t > T m)|F Tm =вҮ’ ЛңYt вҠҘвҠҘPBm Zmt |F Tm ,(118) using the notation in Appendix A.2. Fix m and consider 

EP



WTm I(t > T m) 1 вҲ’ Zmt

 ЛңYt FTm



= WTm I(t > T m)EP

h

(1 вҲ’ Zmt ) ЛңYt FTm

i

.

(119) We show that the right-hand side of (119) is zero almost surely. If this is true, then (117) holds. By definition of W , the right hand size of (119) is zero except on 

{П„ a > T m}. We thus only need to show that EP [Zmt ЛңYt|F Tm ] = EP [ ЛңYt|F Tm ] almost surely on the set {П„ a > T m}. We have 

I(П„ a вҲ§ t > T m)EP

Zmt ЛңYt FTm

 = I(П„ a вҲ§ t > T m)EP

Zmt FTm

EP

 ЛңYt FTm

.

This equality can be seen to follow from (118). Using the martingale representation of Zmt in (113), 

Zmt = 1 + 

Z

I(Tm < s вүӨ Tm+1 вҲ§ t)ZmsвҲ’dKas ,

the optional sampling theorem, [33, I 2 Theorem 16], gives that EP [Zmt |F Tm ] = 1 

P -a.s. for each t. в–Ў

Appendix E. Proofs of main results 

E.1. Proof of Proposition 1. 

The result follows by applying Proposition 4 to the setting of a d-dimensional counting process. To formally do so, we must align the notation of Sections 3вҖ“8 with that of Proposition 4. Specifically, we take X = Id, J = {a}, and for each 

j вҲҲ I d set the mark set to the singleton Xj = {j}. We then identify the counting process component N j with the MPP Оҙj N j , and the canonical compensator Оұj

in (2) with Оҙj Оұj . We similarly identify the intervention na with Оҙana, and take 

LвҖІ = L = 1. The condition (3) is equivalent to the condition (55). The condition (4) combined with the fact that вҲҶ nat (ПҶ) вүӨ 1 implies вҲҶnat (ПҶ) X 

> jМё=a

вҲҶОұjt (ПҶ) = 0 .(120) Together with the premise (16), this gives the orthogonality conditions (54) assumed in Proposition 4. The independence assumptions (I1)-(I3) in that proposition can be satisfied, for instance, by taking all randomizers in (65) to be mutually independent. Hence, all conditions of Proposition 4 are met, and (i) and (iii) in Proposition 1 follow directly from (P1) and (P3) in Proposition 4. Finally, (P2) in Proposition 4 says that П„ вҖІa

Оұa(N вҖІ) is the compensator of N вҖІa with respect to both {F вҖІ 

> t

}t and 

{F вҖІ 

> t

вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңN вҖІ)}t under P вҖІ. By the identity (94) in Lemma 5, this is equivalent to (ii) in Proposition 1. 

> 67

E.2. Proof of Lemma 1. 

Let Xk denote the accompanying mark of Tk, and consider a generic MPP trajec-tory ПҶ = ( tk, x k)kвүҘ1. By [26, Theorem 8.1.2] there is a kernel Оұ(n) from N p to (R+ Г— I p)n, and a function U from R+ Г— R+ Г— N p to R+ such that the density of 

T1, X 1, . . . , T n, X n at t1, x 1, . . . , t n, x n under P is given by 

I(t1 < В· В· В· < t n) В· U (0 , t nвҲ’, ПҶ ) В· Оұ(n)(0 , d (t1, x 1, . . . , t n, x n)) .(121) This expression can be formulated in terms of the canonical compensator of N (see Appendix A.3), Оұ, a kernel from N p to R+ Г— I p, as follows: 

U (0 , t nвҲ’, ПҶ ) = Y

> 0<u вүӨt
> ВҜПҶuвҲ’= ВҜ ПҶu

 1 вҲ’ Оұ(ПҶ, {u} Г— I p)eвҲ’Оұc(ПҶ, (0 ,t ]Г—I p)

(122) 

Оұ(n)(0 , d (t1, x 1, . . . , t n, x n)) = Оұ 0, dt 1 Г— dx 1

 В· Оұ ПҶ|t1 , dt 2 Г— dx 2



(123) 

В· В· В· Оұ ПҶ|tnвҲ’1 , dt n Г— dx n



(124) where ВҜ ПҶu := ПҶ((0 , u ] Г— I p), and 

Оұc(ПҶ, dt Г— I p) = I Оұ(ПҶ, {t} Г— I p) = 0 Оұ(ПҶ, dt Г— I p)is the continuous part of Оұ.Next, we note from (122) that 

U (0 , t nвҲ’, ПҶ ) = U (0 , t 1вҲ’, ПҶ ) В· U (t1, t 2вҲ’, ПҶ ) В· В· В· U (tnвҲ’1, t nвҲ’, ПҶ ),

and that each U (ti, t i+1 вҲ’, ПҶ ) has the representation 

U (ti, t i+1 вҲ’, ПҶ ) = Y

> ti<u<t i+1

 1 вҲ’ Оұ(ПҶ, {u} Г— I p)eвҲ’Оұc(ПҶ, (ti,t i+1 )Г—I p)

= P

> ti<u<t i+1

 1 вҲ’ Оұ(ПҶ, du Г— I p)

by definition of the product-integral [13]. Next, by virtue of N being the identity (we are in the canonical setting) and Оұ is its canonical compensator (actually, it is then just its compensator), we have that 

Оұ(ПҶ, dt Г— dx ) = Оұ(N (ПҶ), dt Г— dx ) = О“( ПҶ, dt Г— dx ),(125) and in particular Оұ(ПҶ, dt Г— A) = Оұ(N (ПҶ), dt Г— A) = О“( ПҶ, dt Г— A) = P 

> jвҲҲA

dО“jt (ПҶ) for 

P -a.e. ПҶ. Combining the equations (124)-(125) with (121) we get the result (19) and hence the finite-dimensional distribution shown in (18). For integrable H вҲҲ H p := W 

> tвүҘ0

Hpt , we define Hn = EP [H|H pTn ], a uniformly integrable martingale with respect to P and {H pTn }nвүҘ1. By LevyвҖҷs upward theorem, [61, Theorem 14.2], there is an integrable random variable HвҲһ such that Hn вҶ’ HвҲһ

P -a.s. and in L1(P ), and HвҲһ = EP [H|H p

> вҲһ

] where Hp 

> вҲһ

= W 

> nвүҘ1

HpTn . Since each 

HpTn is contained in Hp, it follows that HвҲһ is Hp-measurable. Next, by the no explosion assumption we have that {Tn = вҲһ} вҶ‘ О©, and it follows that 

HnI(Tn = вҲһ) вҶ’ HвҲһ P -a.s. and in L1(P )(126) By Theorem 2.2.14 in [26] and its proof, we have the equality HpTn вҲ©{ Tn = вҲһ} =

Пғ(N |Tn ) вҲ© { Tn = вҲһ} = Hp вҲ© { Tn = вҲһ} . Thus, by [24, Lemma 8.3], it follows that 

> 68

EP [H|H pTn ] and EP [H|H p] coincide on {Tn = вҲһ} . Since H is Hp-measurable, we get, P -a.s., 

HnI(Tn = вҲһ) = EP [H|H pTn ]I(Tn = вҲһ)= EP [H|H p]I(Tn = вҲһ) = HI (Tn = вҲһ).

It follows from the preceding equality and (126) that HвҲһ = H P -a.s. and 

Hn вҶ’ H P -a.s. and in L1(P ).(127) The validity of the identity Fn = FвҲһ в—Ұ ПҖвҲ’1 

> n

is a consequence of KolmogorovвҖҷs extension theorem. Next, since Hn is HpTn -measurable we have that Hn в—Ұ ПҖn = Hn,and we may thus regard Hn as a function on either ( R+ Г— I p)n or ( R+ Г— I p)N. With this identification, change of variables gives 

EP [Hn] = 

Z

> (RГ—I p)n

HndF n

=

Z

> (RГ—I p)n

Hnd(FвҲһ в—Ұ ПҖвҲ’1 

> n

)=

Z

> (RГ—I p)N

(Hn в—Ұ ПҖn)dF вҲһ

=

Z

> (RГ—I p)N

HndF вҲһ.

The desired result then follows from (127). в–Ў

E.3. Proof of Lemma 2. 

Before proving Lemma 2, we express first in Lemma 12 the ( Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N under the general conditions in Definition 3. After having established the general result, we show how the compensators shown in Lemma 2 follow under the regularity conditions (4) and (16). To express the compensator in the general case it is convenient to introduce the notation 

вҖў Nj,a := I(П„ a вүӨ В· , вҲҶN jП„ a = 1), and we let Оӣj,a denote the ( P, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of Nj,a respectively. 

Lemma 12 (The ( Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N ). If Definition 3 (iii) holds, then (a) na(N ) defines a ( Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N a,(b) Lj := R В·

> 0
> dОӣjsвҲ’dОӣj,a s
> 1вҲ’вҲҶОӣas

defines a ( Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N j for jМё = a.

Proof. Because the intervention na is predictable we have that na(N ) is an F[0 ,T ]-predictable counting process. Thus, the following direct argument shows Lemma 12 (a): By definition of Q, W , and П„ a, and Lemma 7 v), we get 

EQ[N aП„ ] = EP [WП„ N aП„ ] = EP [WП„ naП„ (N )] = EQ[naП„ (N )] ,(128) for each F[0 ,T ]-optional time П„ . Since na(N ) is F[0 ,T ]-predictable, the preceding equality shows that na(N ) defines a ( Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N a.We show in the following that the ( Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N j for jМё = a is 

вҹЁN j вҹ©Q = вҹЁN j вҹ©P вҲ’

Z В·

> 0

dОӣj,a s вҲ’ вҲҶвҹЁN j вҹ©Ps dОӣas

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

.(129) 

> 69

Here, we use the notation вҹЁВ·вҹ© P вҖІ

for the predictable variation with respect to a probability measure P вҖІ. The filtration it is defined with respect to is fixed in any given derivation and should be clear from the context. By Lemma 7, the predictable variation process вҹЁW, M j вҹ©P exists under P and 

F[0 ,T ], and coincides with R В· 

> 0

WsвҲ’dвҹЁW, M j вҹ©P for each j вҲҲ I d.From [33, III 8 Theorem 41] it follows that Zj = R В· 

> 01
> WsвҲ’

dвҹЁW, M j вҹ©Ps exists under 

Q, and the compensator of N j under Q and F[0 ,T ] is given by вҹЁN j вҹ©P + Zj . We get, using that W = E(Ka), Ka = R В· 

> 0

GsdMas , and G = вҲ’ 11вҲ’вҲҶОӣa ,

Z В·

> 0

1

WsвҲ’

dвҹЁW, M j вҹ©Ps =

Z В·

> 0

WsвҲ’

WsвҲ’

dвҹЁKa, M j вҹ©Ps = вҹЁKa, M j вҹ©P =

Z В·

> 0

GsвҹЁMa, M j вҹ©Ps .

The integrator in the second equality is zero whenever the integrand equals вҖқ 00 вҖқ, which justifies the middle equality. We conclude that 

вҹЁN j вҹ©Q = вҹЁN j вҹ©P +

Z В·

> 0

GsdвҹЁMa, M j вҹ©Ps .(130) To express the integral on the right-hand side of (130) it is useful to find [ M j , Ma]: [M j , Ma] = [ N j вҲ’ вҹЁ N j вҹ©P , Na вҲ’ Оӣa]= [ N j , Na] вҲ’ [вҹЁN j вҹ©P , Na] вҲ’ [N j , Оӣa] + [ вҹЁN j вҹ©P , Оӣa]= Nj,a вҲ’

Z В·

> 0

вҲҶвҹЁN j вҹ©Ps dNas вҲ’

Z В·

> 0

вҲҶОӣas dN j +

Z В·

> 0

вҲҶвҹЁN j вҹ©Ps dОӣas .

(131) This gives, since the predictable bracket defines a compensator of the optional bracket, 

вҹЁM j , Maвҹ©P = Оӣj,a вҲ’

Z В·

> 0

вҲҶвҹЁN j вҹ©Ps dОӣas .

Since G = вҲ’ 11вҲ’вҲҶОӣa we get the result 

вҹЁN j вҹ©Q = вҹЁN j вҹ©P +

Z В·

> 0

GsdвҹЁM j , Maвҹ©Ps

= вҹЁN j вҹ©P вҲ’

Z В·

> 0

11 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

(dОӣj,a s вҲ’ вҲҶвҹЁN j вҹ©Ps dОӣas ).

Upon arranging terms, this gives (b). в–Ў

Proof of Lemma 2. We verify the simplifications for the non-treatment component, i.e., that Lemma 12 (b) reduces. First, we show that Nj,a = Оӣj,a = 0. Con-dition (4) implies that na(N ) shares no jumps with N j for jМё = a; that is, we have [ na(N ), N j ] = 0 P -a.s. for jМё = a. By assumption, N = ( N 1, . . . , N d) is a multivariate counting process, so distinct components do not jump simultane-ously, i.e. [N a, N j ] = 0 P -a.s. for each jМё = a. Since П„ a is an optional time supported on jumps of N a and na(N ) (by (8)), we obtain вҲҶ N jП„ a I(П„ a < вҲһ) вүӨP

> iМё=a

[N a, N i]T + [ na(N ), N i]T = 0 P -a.s., and thus Nj,a = 0 P -a.s. for each jМё = a.It follows that Оӣj,a = 0 P -a.s. From Lemma 12 we therefore have 

Lj =

Z В·

> 0

dОӣjs

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

.

> 70

The desired result Lj = Оӣ j follows if we can show that вҲҶОӣas вҲҶОӣ js = 0 P -a.s. (132) for each s and jМё = a.Recall the representation (92): 

Оӣa = П„ a

Оӣa + П„ a

na(N ) вҲ’ 2

Z П„ aвҲ§В· 

> 0

вҲҶnas (N )dОӣas .

Since na(N ) is a predictable counting process satisfying (4), we have вҲҶ na(N )вҲҶОӣ j =0, and by assumption (16) we have вҲҶОӣ aвҲҶОӣ j = 0 for jМё = a. Combining this with (92), it follows that (132) holds. Therefore, 

Z В·

> 0

dОӣjs

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

= Оӣ j .

в–Ў

E.4. Proof of Theorem 2. 

Because W is a mean one nonnegative uniformly integrable ( P, F[0 ,T ])-martingale (shown in Lemma 8), it follows that dQ = WT dP defines a probability measure on FT . Lemma 1 states that the distribution under Q is determined by the com-pensator in the canonical setting. This compensator was found in Lemma 2 and is given in (21). The representation (22) then follows by combining Theorem 1, Lemma 1 and Lemma 2. в–Ў

E.5. Proof of Proposition 2. Proof of the characterization of W though (A) and (B). 

We establish the alternative characterization of W involving the items (A)-(B). We denote by W h the process which solves 

W ht = 1 + 

Z t

> 0

W hsвҲ’dKhs

Kht =

Z t

> 0

hsdMas

subject to (A) and (B). As W h is non-negative, the item (B) gives that W hП„ a = 0 and W hП„ aвҲ’ > 0 on {П„ a < вҲһ} . Using that W h solves the given SDE we get that 

W hП„ a = W hП„ aвҲ’ + W hП„ aвҲ’вҲҶKhП„ a

= W hП„ aвҲ’ + W hП„ aвҲ’hП„ a вҲҶMaП„ a

= W hП„ aвҲ’ + W hП„ aвҲ’hП„ a (вҲҶ NaП„ a вҲ’ вҲҶОӣaП„ a )= W hП„ aвҲ’ + W hП„ aвҲ’hП„ a (1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣaП„ a )on {П„ a < вҲһ} , where we used the definition of П„ a and Na in the last line. By rearranging terms we conclude that W h satisfies (B) only if 

hП„ a = вҲ’ 11 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣaП„ a

on {П„ a < вҲһ} .

Using this fact and the definition of Na we get that 

Z В·

> 0

hsdNas = hП„ a Na = вҲ’ 11 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣaП„ a

Na = вҲ’

Z В·

> 0

11 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

dNas .

> 71

This gives Z В·

> 0

hsdMas =

Z В·

> 0

hsdNas вҲ’

Z В·

> 0

hsdОӣas

= вҲ’

Z В·

> 0

11 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

dNas вҲ’

Z В·

> 0

hsdОӣas

= вҲ’

Z В·

> 0

11 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

dMas вҲ’

Z В·

> 0



hs + 11 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas



dОӣas

| {z }

> =:ОҘ

where we obtained the last line by adding and subtracting terms. Since R В· 

> 0

hsdMas

(by assumption) and R В·

> 011вҲ’вҲҶОӣas

dMas (by Lemma 7) are local martingales of finite variation, it follows from the last equality that ОҘ is also a finite variation local martingale. It is furthermore a predictable process. Since ОҘ 0 = 0, and ОҘ is a predictable finite variation local martingale, it follows from [33, III Theorem 15] that ОҘ = 0 P -a.s., and thus R В· 

> 0

hsdMas = вҲ’ R В·

> 011вҲ’вҲҶОӣas

dMas = Ka P -a.s. By uniqueness of solutions of the stochastic exponential, e.g. [33, II Theorem 37], it follows that 

W h = E(R В· 

> 0

hsdMas ) = E(Ka) = W P -a.s., where W is the process given in (24). 

Proof that (24) solves (11) .

In our case E(вҲ’Оӣa) has the unique solution P

> 0<s вүӨВ·

 1вҲ’dОӣas

; see [12]. A calculation with indicator processes shows that I(П„ a > В·) = E(вҲ’Na), which validates the rightmost equality in (24). We use properties of stochastic exponentials to show that E(вҲ’Na)/E(вҲ’Оӣa) coincides with the stochastic exponential of Ka in (10). Since 0 вүӨ вҲҶОӣa вүӨ 1, we have by (9) that the process P 

> 0<s вүӨВ·
> (вҲҶ Оӣas)2
> 1вҲ’вҲҶОӣas

= R В·

> 0вҲҶОӣas
> 1вҲ’вҲҶОӣas

dОӣas is of finite variation. Thus, the process 28 

J = Оӣa + [ Оӣa]c + X

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )2

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

.(133) is a well-defined semimartingale, and [33, Section V, Theorem 63, p 342] then says that E(вҲ’Оӣa)вҲ’1 = E(J). By [33, Section II, Theorem 38, p 86], we get 

W = E(J)E(вҲ’Na) = E(J вҲ’ Na вҲ’ [J, Na]) .

In our case we have that [ Оӣa]c = 0, since Оӣa is a quadratic pure jump semimartin-gale, e.g. by [33, II 6 Theorem 26]. Thus, by the bilinearity of the quadratic variation process we get that [J, Na] = 

h

Оӣa + [ Оӣa]c + X

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )2

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

, Nai

= Оӣa, Na + [Оӣa]c, Na +

h X 

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )2

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

, Nai

= Оӣa, Na +

h X 

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )2

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

, Nai

.     

> 28 Here, [ Z]cis the path-by-path continuous part of [ Z] for a semimartingale Z, which is defined by [ Z]c= [ Z]вҲ’P
> 0<s вүӨВ· (вҲҶ Zs)2.
> 72

This gives 

J вҲ’ Na вҲ’ [J, Na] = вҲ’Ma + [ Оӣa]c + X

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )2

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

вҲ’ Оӣa, Na

вҲ’

h X 

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )2

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

, Nai

= вҲ’Ma + [ Оӣa] вҲ’ X

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )2 + X

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )2

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

вҲ’ Оӣa, Na

вҲ’

h X 

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )2

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

, Nai

.

The identities 

вҲ’ X

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )2 + X

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )2

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

= X

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )3

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

,

h X 

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )2

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

, Nai

= X

> 0<u вүӨВ·

вҲҶ X

> 0<s вүӨu

(вҲҶ Оӣas )2

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

вҲҶNau

= X

> 0<u вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣau)2

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣau

вҲҶNau,

together give that 

J вҲ’ Na вҲ’ [J, Na] = вҲ’Ma + [ Оӣa] + X

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )3

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

вҲ’ Оӣa, Na вҲ’

h X 

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )2

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

, Nai

= вҲ’Ma + [ Оӣa] вҲ’ X

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )2

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

вҲҶMas вҲ’ Оӣa, Na

= вҲ’Ma вҲ’ [Оӣa, Ma] вҲ’ X

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )2

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

вҲҶMas .

Next, using that Оӣa is a quadratic pure jump semimartingale, we get [Оӣa, Ma] + X

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )2

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

вҲҶMas = X

> 0<s вүӨВ·

вҲҶОӣas вҲҶMas + X

> 0<s вүӨВ·

(вҲҶ Оӣas )2

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

вҲҶMas

= X

> 0<s вүӨВ·

вҲҶОӣas

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

вҲҶMas =

Z В·

> 0

вҲҶОӣas

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

dMas .

Finally, since 

Ma +

Z В·

> 0

вҲҶОӣas

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

dMas =

Z В·

> 0



1 + вҲҶОӣas

1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas



dMas =

Z В·

> 0

11 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas

dMas ,

we get the advertised result. 

Derivation of (25) .

> 73

We establish the expression (25). Since Оӣa is cadlag and predictable it follows that the jump times {Пғk}k of Оӣa are predictable as well. 29 We thus get, by the definition of the product-integral, 

P

> sвүӨt

(1 вҲ’ dОӣas ) = eвҲ’Оӣa,c t

Y

> sвүӨt

(1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣas ) = eвҲ’Оӣa,c t

Y 

> ПғkвүӨt

(1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣa 

> Пғk

)= eвҲ’Оӣa,c t

Y 

> ПғkвүӨt

P (Na 

> Пғk

= 0 |F Пғk вҲ’),

where we used that each Пғk is predictable and [26, Equation (4.1.16)] in the last equality, which gives the result. 

Proof of (26) and the SDE for predictable interventions. 

The representation of Оӣa in terms of Оӣ a and na(N ) was shown in Lemma 5. Inserting this representation into (24) leads to (26). We establish the alternative representation Ka = вҲ’ R П„ aвҲ§В·   

> 011вҲ’вҲҶnas(N)вҲ’вҲҶОӣ as

dM as .By combining Lemma 5 with the expression for Ka we get that Ka = вҲ’ R П„ aвҲ§В·        

> 01вҲ’2вҲҶ nas(N)1вҲ’вҲҶОӣ asвҲ’вҲҶnas(N)+2вҲҶ nas(N)вҲҶОӣ as

dM as . Algebraic manipulation of the integrand in this equation gives 1 вҲ’ 2вҲҶ nas (N )1 вҲ’ вҲҶnas (N ) вҲ’ (1 вҲ’ 2вҲҶ nas (N ))вҲҶОӣ as

= 1     

> 1вҲ’вҲҶnas(N)1вҲ’2вҲҶ nas(N)

вҲ’ вҲҶОӣ as

= 11 вҲ’ вҲҶnas (N ) вҲ’ вҲҶОӣ as

,

(134) where the final equality can be seen by checking the two cases вҲҶ nas (N ) = 1 and вҲҶnas (N ) = 0. в–Ў

E.6. Proof of Proposition 3. Equivalence of exchangeability conditions. 

Since the compensators are piecewise constant, the only possible jump times of the counting processes are at the jump times of their compensators. Since the regime na is predictable, we can use the representation in Lemma 5 and the a.s. representation 

Ma =

Z П„ aвҲ§В· 

> 0

(1 вҲ’ 2вҲҶ nas (N )) dM as .

It follows from this that Ma is a martingale with respect to a superfiltration of 

F[0 ,T ] if and only if П„ a

M a is a martingale with respect to that filtration. A key fact in what follows is that jumps of compensators at predictable times (and thus in 

> 29

This follows by application of [26, Theorem 2.1.30]. This theorem says that if Y is a nonneg-ative, nondecreasing, right-continuous, predictable process, then for any c вҲҲ R, inf {t > 0|Yt вүҘ c}

is a predictable time. Applying this result to the discontinuous part Z = Оӣa вҲ’ Оӣa,c where Оӣa,c 

is the continuous part of Оӣa and a sequence of constants {cn}n, cn > 0 with cn вҶ“ 0, we get a sequence of predictable times 

П„ 1 

> n

:= inf {t > 0|Zt вүҘ cn}.

By construction, вҲ§nП„ 1 

> n

= Пғ1, where Пғ1 is the first jump time of Z (and hence of Оӣa). Since each 

П„ 1 

> n

is predictable, вҲ§nП„ 1 

> n

= Пғ1 is also a predictable time; see, e.g., [22, I 2 Proposition 2.9]. Because 

Пғ1 is a predictable time, it follows that the process started at Пғ1, Пғ1 Zt := I(t > Пғ1)( Zt вҲ’ ZПғ1 ), satisfies the conditions of [26, Theorem 2.1.30]. We can thus apply the previous argument to Пғ1 Z

to show that Пғ2 is a predictable time, and by induction that Пғk is a predictable time for each k.

> 74

particular deterministic times) admit explicit representations, see e.g. [26, Theorem 4.1.7]; we have that П„ a

Оӣa is a ( P, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of П„ a

N a if and only if вҲҶ П„ a

ОӣaОёk = EP [вҲҶ П„ a

N aОёk |F Оёk вҲ’] P -a.s. (135) for each k. We similarly have that the exchangeability condition (13) in this case is equivalent to вҲҶ П„ a

ОӣaОёk = EP [вҲҶ П„ a

N aОёk |F Оёk вҲ’ вҲЁ ЛңF\aT ] P -a.s. for each k, where ЛңF\aT = Пғ( ЛңN 1|T , . . . , ЛңN aвҲ’1|T , ЛңN a+1 |T , . . . , ЛңN d|T ). It follows that (13) is equivalent to 

EP [вҲҶ П„ a

N aОёk |F Оёk вҲ’] = EP [вҲҶ П„ a

N aОёk |F Оёk вҲ’ вҲЁ ЛңF\aT ] P -a.s. for k = 1 , . . . , K. (136) Define Ck = { ВҜAk = ВҜ ak} for k вүҘ 1 and C0 = О©. We show that the identity (136) is identical to 

PCkвҲ’1 (Ak = 1 | ВҜLk) = PCkвҲ’1 (Ak = 1 | ВҜLk, ЛңLk+1 ) PCkвҲ’1 -a.s. (137) for each k, where PCk (В·) = P (Ck вҲ© В· )/P (Ck) is the Ck-conditional-probability mea-sure, which is defined since P (Ck) > 0. It is sufficient to show this equivalence because, since Ak is binary, the statement (137) is equivalent to 

Ak вҠҘвҠҘPCkвҲ’1

ЛңLk+1 | ВҜLk,

which is equivalent to (30). By well known identities of point process filtrations, [26, Theorem 2.2.15], we have that 

FОёk вҲ’ = Пғ(N |Оёk вҲ’) вҲЁ Пғ(Оёk)= Пғ(вҲҶ N 1

> в„“11

, . . . , вҲҶN aОё1 , вҲҶN 1

> в„“12

, . . . , вҲҶN aОё2 , вҲҶN 1

> в„“13

, . . . , вҲҶN kв„“dвҲ’1

> k

).

The last equality follows because the trajectories of N |Оёk вҲ’ are fully determined by the variables вҲҶ N 1

> в„“11

, . . . , вҲҶN aОё1 , . . . , вҲҶN kв„“dвҲ’1

> k

, as the times {Оёk}k, {в„“jk}k,j are deter-ministic. Recalling the definitions of the variables {Ak}, {Ljk}, and {Lk}, we thus get 

FОёk вҲ’ = Пғ(вҲҶ N 1

> в„“11

, . . . , вҲҶN aОё1 , вҲҶN 1

> в„“12

, . . . , вҲҶN aОё2 , вҲҶN 1

> в„“13

, . . . , вҲҶN kв„“dвҲ’1

> k

)= Пғ(L1, A 1, . . . , L kвҲ’1, A kвҲ’1, L k) = Пғ( ВҜLk, ВҜAkвҲ’1).

(138) Next, since the jump times of na(N ) are contained in {Оёk}k, we have that {П„ a вүҘ

Оёk} = { ВҜAkвҲ’1 = ВҜ akвҲ’1} = CkвҲ’1. (In words, these equalities say that if the observed regime is followed through treatment visit k вҲ’ 1, it is at least followed until the next treatment decision is being recorded). This leads to the identities 

ICkвҲ’1 вҲҶ П„ a

N aОёk = ICkвҲ’1 вҲҶN aОёk = ICkвҲ’1 I(Ak = 1) ,ICckвҲ’1 вҲҶ П„ a

N aОёk = 0 ,

ВҜLk = ВҜЛңLk PCkвҲ’1 -a.s., (139) 

> 75

where the last line holds due to consistency. We get, using the identities in (139) and that CkвҲ’1 is measurable with respect to Пғ( ВҜAkвҲ’1), the P -a.s. equalities 

EP

вҲҶ П„ a

N aОёk |F Оёk вҲ’

 = EP

вҲҶ П„ a

N aОёk | ВҜLk, ВҜAkвҲ’1



= EP

вҲҶ П„ a

N aОёk | ВҜLk, ВҜAkвҲ’1

  ICkвҲ’1 + ICckвҲ’1



= EP

вҲҶ П„ a

N aОёk | ВҜLk, ВҜAkвҲ’1

ICkвҲ’1

= P (Ak = 1 | ВҜLk, ВҜAkвҲ’1)ICkвҲ’1

= P (Ak = 1 | ВҜLk, ВҜAkвҲ’1 = ВҜ akвҲ’1)ICkвҲ’1

= PCkвҲ’1 (Ak = 1 | ВҜLk)ICkвҲ’1 .

(140) In the two last lines we used well-known identities of partial conditional expectation and conditional expectation with respect to event-conditional-probability measures such as PCkвҲ’1 ; see e.g. [30, Remark 14.31 and Theorem 14.33]. By similar argu-ments as those leading to (138) we can identify ЛңF\aT with the Пғ-algebra generated by the variables { ЛңLk}k;ЛңF\aT = ЛңF\aв„“K+1 ,d вҲ’1

= Пғ( ЛңL11, . . . , ЛңLdвҲ’11 , ЛңL12, . . . , ЛңLdвҲ’12 , . . . , ЛңLdвҲ’1

> K+1

)= Пғ( ЛңL1, . . . , ЛңLK+1 ) = Пғ( ВҜЛңLK+1 )Using similar arguments as in (140) we therefore get 

EP

вҲҶ П„ a

N aОёk |F Оёk вҲ’ вҲЁ ЛңF\aT



= EP

вҲҶ П„ a

N aОёk | ВҜLk, ВҜAkвҲ’1, ВҜЛңLK+1 

  ICkвҲ’1 + ICckвҲ’1



= EP

вҲҶ П„ a

N aОёk | ВҜLk, ВҜAkвҲ’1, ВҜЛңLK+1 

ICkвҲ’1

= PCkвҲ’1 (Ak = 1 | ВҜLk, ВҜЛңLK+1 )ICkвҲ’1 .

(141) Since ВҜЛңLk = ВҜLk PCkвҲ’1 -a.s. (see (139)), we have in particular that 

пЈ«пЈӯ

ВҜLk

ВҜЛңLk

ЛңLk+1 

пЈ¶пЈё =

пЈ«пЈӯ

ВҜLk

ВҜLk

ЛңLk+1 

пЈ¶пЈё PCkвҲ’1 -a.s. From simple checks of the definition of conditional expectation we can deduce from this that 

PCkвҲ’1 (Ak = 1 | ВҜLk, ВҜЛңLK+1 ) = PCkвҲ’1 (Ak = 1 | ВҜLk, ЛңLk+1 ) PCkвҲ’1 -a.s. Combining this result with (141), using (140), we see that (136) holds if and only if 

PCkвҲ’1 (Ak = 1 | ВҜLk)ICkвҲ’1 = PCkвҲ’1 (Ak = 1 | ВҜLk, ЛңLk+1 )ICkвҲ’1 , P -a.s. which is equivalent to the desired equality (137). 

Equivalence of positivity conditions. 

Under the premises of the proposition, the paths of Оӣa are piecewise constant with jumps in {Оёk}k. Thus, R В·

> 0
> dОӣas
> 1вҲ’вҲҶОӣas

= P 

> k:ОёkвүӨВ·
> вҲҶОӣaОёk
> 1вҲ’вҲҶОӣaОёk

. Since the number of 

> 76

terms in the sum is finite, (9) holds if and only if 

P (вҲҶ ОӣaОёk < 1) = 1 for k = 1 , . . . , K + 1 .(142) From the observation that {вҲҶNaОёk = 1 } = {П„ a = Оёk} = {AkМё = ak, ВҜAkвҲ’1 = ВҜ akвҲ’1},using that вҲҶ ОӣaОёk = EP [вҲҶ NaОёk |F Оёk вҲ’] (using again that the ОёkвҖҷs are deterministic, and thus predictable, and e.g. [26, Theorem 4.1.7]), we get that вҲҶОӣaОёk = P (вҲҶ NaОёk = 1 |F Оёk вҲ’) = P (AkМё = ak| ВҜLk, ВҜAkвҲ’1)I( ВҜAkвҲ’1 = ВҜ akвҲ’1),(143) where we used (138). It follows that (142) holds if and only if 

P (Ak = ak| ВҜLk, A kвҲ’1) > 0 P -a.s. on { ВҜAkвҲ’1 = ВҜ akвҲ’1}

for k = 1 , . . . , K + 1, which is the condition (32). We show that Definition 3 (iii) holds. If (32) holds (i.e. that (9) holds, under the assumptions of this proposition), then Ka in (11) is a local martingale by Lemma 7. In particular, it is a well-defined semimartingale, and (11) is well-defined, with the solution given in Proposition 2, (e.g. by [33, II 8 Theorem 37]), 

Wt = I(П„ a > t )

P0<s вүӨt(1 вҲ’ Оӣas ) .

This is also a local martingale, as highlighted in Lemma 7. Since the only contri-bution to the product are at the times {Оёk}, which are discontinuity points of Оӣ a,we get by (143) 

Wt = I( ВҜAkвҲ— 

> t

= ВҜ akвҲ— 

> t

)

QkвҲ— 

> t
> j=1

P (Aj = aj | ВҜLj , ВҜAjвҲ’1) ,(144) where kвҲ— 

> t

= sup {k|Оёk вүӨ t}, and where we used (138) once more. Wt is almost surely finite under (32). Writing out EP [Wt] in terms of the law of the observed variables, this is a finite sum of terms which are finite (otherwise Wt would not have been almost surely finite), and thus Wt is integrable for each t. In particular, 

WОёk is integrable for each k, which implies that sup sвүӨt Ws = max {WОёk |Оёk вүӨ t} is integrable for each t. Since W is a local martingale, it follows from this observation and [33, I 6 Theorem 51] that it is a true martingale. Thus EP [Wt] = EP [W0] = 1 for each t вҲҲ [0 , T ], and (14) holds. 

Reduction of the data-generating law. 

Since na is predictable, we have from (5) that ЛңN a = na( ЛңN ) P -a.s. With the notation and regime stated in the proposition, we get that ЛңAk = ak P -a.s. for each 

k.Next, we use that ЛңОӣj defines a compensator of ЛңN j with respect to ЛңF[0 ,T ], and that Оӣj defines a compensator of N j with respect to F[0 ,T ]. Since each в„“jk is deterministic (and thus predictable), we have that, P -a.s., вҲҶОӣ jв„“jk

= EP [вҲҶ N jв„“jk

|F в„“jk вҲ’] = P (Lk = 1 |F в„“jk вҲ’),

вҲҶЛңОӣjв„“jk

= EP [вҲҶ ЛңN jв„“jk

| ЛңFв„“jk вҲ’] = P ( ЛңLk = 1 | ЛңFв„“jk вҲ’),

(145) where the rightmost equalities follow since we have defined Ljk = вҲҶ N jв„“jk

and ЛңLjk =вҲҶ ЛңN jв„“jk

. Arguing as in (138) we find that Fв„“jk вҲ’ = Пғ(Lk,<j , ВҜAkвҲ’1), and similarly 

> 77

ЛңFв„“jk вҲ’ = Пғ( ЛңLk,<j , ВҜЛңAkвҲ’1). It follows from (145) and the definition of f jk that 

P ( ЛңLjk = 1 | ЛңLk,<j , ВҜЛңAkвҲ’1) = P ( ЛңLjk = 1 | ЛңFв„“jk вҲ’) = вҲҶ ЛңОӣjв„“jk

= f jk (x, y )|x= ЛңLk,<j ,y = ВҜЛңAkвҲ’1

= f jk ( ЛңLk,<j , ВҜЛңAkвҲ’1),

where the equalities in the first line hold almost surely and the equalities in the last line hold by definition. в–Ў

E.7. Proof of Theorem 3. 

By the regularity conditions (38)-(41), Proposition 4 in Appendix B guarantees that there is a probability space supporting observed and potential outcome pro-cesses with the respective correct laws such that the consistency condition (i) in Theorem 3 holds, and for each j вҲҲ J, the condition (97) of Lemma 9 is satisfied.  

> 30

Next, since (97) holds for each j вҲҲ J, the exchangeability condition (ii) of The-orem 3 also holds, as shown in Lemma 9. Thus, under the theoremвҖҷs regularity conditions (assumptions (38)-(41)), the consistency and exchangeability conditions in Theorem 3 (i)-(ii) can be made to hold simultaneously; that is, these conditions do not impose hidden restrictions on the observed data law. The formula (42), i.e. 

EP [ ЛңYt] = EP [E(KJ )tYt] = EQ[Yt],

with dQ = E(KJ )dP , is derived using the same arguments as used in Theorem 1. Specifically, under the conditions (36), and (i), (ii) and (iii) of Theorem 3, the process E(KJ ) satisfies properties parallel to those established for W = E(K) in Lemma 7 and Lemma 8, with KJ , NJ , ОӣJ , and П„ J playing the roles of Ka, Na, Оӣa,and П„ a, respectively. Using these properties, the proof of (42) follow the lines of the proof of Theorem 1. As in Lemma 1, to express the distribution under Q, we first need to find the (Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N . We make use of similar techniques as in Lemma 2 to derive the compensator. First, for j вҲҲ J, we have by definition of dQ = E(KJ )dP, KJ , and П„ J , that 

nj (L, N ) = N j Q-a.s. This can be shown by analogous techniques as those in Lemma 6. It follows from predictability that nj (L, N ) defines a ( Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensating measure of N j . This can formally be established by arguing as in (128), with 

dQ = E(KJ )T dP , and N j ((0 , В·] Г— D) in place of N a and nj (L, N, (0 , В·] Г— D) in place of na(N ) in (128), for each D вҲҲ X j .It remains to find the ( Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensating measure of N i for iМё вҲҲ J. Analo-gous to the notation used to state Lemma 12, we define 

Ni,J ((0 , t ] Г— В· ) = I(П„ J вүӨ t, N i({П„ J } Г— В· ) = 1) ,

and denote by Оӣi,J the compensating measure of Ni,J with respect to P and F[0 ,T ].For iМё вҲҲ J and D вҲҲ X i, we define N i,D t := N i((0 , t ]Г—D). Repeating the Girsanov-type calculations that led to (130) (see Lemma 12 for details), we obtain 

вҹЁN i,D вҹ©Q = вҹЁN i,D вҹ©P +

Z В·

> 0

GsdвҹЁM i,D , MJ вҹ©Ps ,

> 30 Choose, for instance the randomizers in (65) in Proposition 4 to be mutually independent, so that the independence assumptions (I1) - (I3) in Proposition 4 hold.
> 78

where M i,D := N i,D вҲ’ вҹЁ N i,D вҹ©P , G = вҲ’ 11вҲ’вҲҶОӣJ , MJ := NJ вҲ’ ОӣJ , and the predictable brackets are defined with respect to the filtration F[0 ,T ]. We furthermore get that 

вҹЁM i,D , MJ вҹ©P = вҹЁNi,J ((0 , В·] Г— D)вҹ©P вҲ’

Z В·

> 0

вҲҶОӣJs dвҹЁN i,D вҹ©Ps

= Оӣi,J ((0 , В·] Г— D) вҲ’

Z В·

> 0

вҲҶОӣJs dОӣi((0 , s ] Г— D).

Using the preceding line and the definition of G, we conclude that 

вҹЁN i,D вҹ©Q = вҹЁN i,D вҹ©P вҲ’

Z В·

> 0

dОӣi,J ((0 , s ] Г— D) вҲ’ вҲҶОӣJs dОӣi((0 , s ] Г— D)1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣJs

,

which determines the ( Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensating measure of N i. As Li((0 , В·] Г— D) = 

вҹЁN i,D вҹ©P = Оӣ i((0 , В·] Г— D) we get by algebraic manipulation that 

Li(dt Г— dx ) = Оӣi(dt Г— dx ) вҲ’ Оӣi,J (dt Г— dx )1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣJt

,

where Li is the ( Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N i.We show that Оӣi,J = 0 under (40). For j вҲҲ J, define Ajt := nj (L, N, (0 , t ] Г— Xj ). Condition (40) implies that Aj shares no jumps with ВҜN i for iМё вҲҲ J, i.e. [ Aj , ВҜN i] = 0 

P -a.s. for each j вҲҲ J. Since N is an MPP, ( ВҜN 1, . . . , ВҜN d) is a multivariate counting process, so distinct components do not jump simultaneously, i.e. [ ВҜN j , ВҜN i] = 0 P -a.s. for jМё = i. Because П„ J is an optional time supported on the jump times of ВҜN j and 

Aj for j вҲҲ J, we obtain the bound вҲҶ ВҜN iП„ J I(П„ J < вҲһ) вүӨ P

> jвҲҲJ

P  

> zМёвҲҲJ

[ ВҜN j , ВҜN z ]T +[Aj , ВҜN z ]T = 0 P -a.s., and thus Ni,J = 0 P -a.s. for each iМё вҲҲ J. It follows that 

Оӣi,J = 0 P -a.s., where this equality also holds Q-a.s. because Q вүӘ P . We are left with 

Li(dt Г— dx ) = Оӣi(dt Г— dx )1 вҲ’ вҲҶОӣJt

.(146) Finally, we use that NJ satisfies the bound NJ вүӨ P

> jвҲҲJ

P 

> k

Nj,k where Nj,k are as in (99). The compensator ОӣJ thus satisfies вҲҶОӣJt вүӨ X

> jвҲҲJ

X

> k

вҲҶОӣj,k t P -a.s. ,

where, using the decomposition in (99), вҲҶ Оӣj,k t = П„ j,k 

Оӣj ({t}Г—{ xjk})+ П„ j,k 

nj (L, N, {t}Г— {xjk}) вҲ’ 2 R П„ j,k вҲ§t 

> 0

nj (L, N, {s} Г— { xjk})Оӣ j (ds Г— { xjk}) for some enumeration {xjk}k of 

Xj . Since Оӣ j = Оұj (L, N ), the regularity conditions (39)-(40) imply that Оӣj,k does not share jumps with Оӣ i for iМё вҲҲ J. Consequently, Оӣi({t} Г— dx )вҲҶ ОӣJt = 0 P -a.s. which combined with (146) gives the desired result 

Li(dt Г— dx ) = Оӣ i(dt Г— dx ).

We now make sense of the integral in (43). Since X is Borel it follows that N XT is Borel, and there consequently is a kernel KQ from S to N XT so that Q (L, N ) вҲҲ

dl Г— dПҶ  = KQ(l, dПҶ )FL(dl ). KQ(l, dПҶ ) is a regular version of the conditional distribution of N given L = l under Q, and FL(dl ) = P (L вҲҲ dl ) = Q(L вҲҲ dl )because Q|F0 = P |F0 .

> 79

Write ОұQ is the canonical compensator of N with respect to Q and F[0 ,T ]. The conditional distribution of N given L = l under Q, KQ(l, dПҶ ), can be derived by similar arguments to those shown in the proof of Lemma 1, with the kernel (for fixed l) ОұQ(l, В·) in place of Оұ in that proof. Since (О© , F) = ( S Г— N XT , S вҠ— H XT )and ( L, N ) = Id (we assume that we are in the canonical setting), we have, by the relationship between the canonical compensator and the compensator, that 

ОұQ(l, ПҶ, dt Г— dx ) = ОұQ (L, N )( l, ПҶ ), dt Г— dx  = L(l, ПҶ, dt Г— dx )for P -a.e. (l, ПҶ ), where L is the ( Q, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N , displayed in (44). This represents the distribution in terms of the compensator, analogously to Lemma 1. The derivation of the distributional representation on the right-hand side of (43) follows step for step the proof of Lemma 1 and is therefore omitted. 

в–Ў

Appendix F. Notation 

General mathematical notation. 

(О© , F, P ) The underlying abstract probability space where P is a fixed, but arbitrary, probability measure 

x вҲ§ y, x вҲЁ y The minimum of x and y, and the maximum of x and y

A вҲЁ B The join of two Пғ-algebras A and B; the smallest Пғ-algebra which contains both A and B

ВҜxi, x i The first i components ( x1, . . . , x i) of a vector x = ( x1, . . . ), and the vector ( xi, . . . ) subsequent to the iвҖҷth component of a vector x = ( x1, . . . )

R, R+, N The set of real numbers, non-negative real numbers, and nat-ural numbers excluding zero 

Point processes. 

Id The index set {1, . . . , d }

N , N j N = ( N j )jвҲҲI d is a multivariate counting process or an MPP; 

N j denotes its jth component 

Tn, X n The nвҖҷth jump time and mark of N

FT , F[0 ,T ] The observed Пғ-algebra and filtration on [0 , T ]; generated by N

before Section 9, and generated by L, N starting from Section 9

ПҶ A generic point process trajectory. It may be represented via a double sequence of times and marks and as a counting measure. If the mark set is Id it may be represented as a multivariate counting process trajectory (see Appendix A.3) 

ПҶ|t, ПҶ |tвҲ’ The restriction of a point process trajectory ПҶ to the interval [0 , t ], resp. [0 , t ) (see Appendix A.3) (N XT , HXT ) The canonical space of realizations of an MPP on [0 , T ] with mark set X (see Appendix A.3). We use the shorthand nota-tion N dT := N Id 

> T

and HdT := HId

> T

(S Г— N XT , S вҠ— H XT ) The canonical space of realizations of ( L, N ), where L takes values in ( S, S) and N is an MPP on [0 , T ] with mark set X

(see Appendix A.3) 

> 80

Оұ, Оұj The canonical compensator of N (N j ) with respect to P and 

F[0 ,T ]

Оӣ, Оӣ j The ( P, F[0 ,T ])-compensator of N (N j )ЛңОұ The canonical compensator of the potential outcome process ЛңN (see Section 9.1 and Appendix B) 

M The local ( P, F[0 ,T ])-martingale N вҲ’ Оӣ

General process definitions. 

ZвҲ’ The process defined by ZtвҲ’ = lim ПөвҶ’0+ ZtвҲ’Пө (assuming left-limits exist) вҲҶZ The process Z вҲ’ ZвҲ’, when Z is a process having left limits  

> П„

Z The process Z stopped at a random time П„ , defined by {ZП„ вҲ§t}tП„ Z The process Z started at a random time П„ , defined by {I(t > П„ )( Zt вҲ’ ZП„ )}t

ВҜZ The total process ВҜZ = Pki=1 Zi for a process Z = ( Z1, . . . , Z k), or ВҜZt = Z((0 , t ] Г— S) for a random measure Z operating on [0 , T ] Г— S

E(В·) The stochastic exponential; E(Z) is the unique solution of the SDE U = 1 + R В· 

> 0

UsвҲ’dZ s for a semimartingale Z

[В·, В·] The optional variation process (see Appendix A). [ Z] := [ Z, Z ]

вҹЁВ· , В·вҹ© P The predictable variation under the probability measure P and filtration under study (see Appendix A). вҹЁZвҹ©P := вҹЁZ, Z вҹ©P

Interventions and identifying likelihood ratio processes. 

J Subset of Id indexing intervention components (used in Section 9 and later) 

na, nj An intervention on component a (single intervention case) or component j (multiple interventions, j вҲҲ J)

na(N ), nj (L, N ) The intervention evaluated at the observed trajectories; na(N )in the single intervention case before Section 9, nj (L, N ) for multiple interventions (starting from Section 9) 

П„ a, П„ j , П„ J П„ a is the first time the observed treatment process deviates from the intervention evaluated in the observed trajectories (see (8) for the definition before Section 9), and (35) for the definition starting from Section 9); П„ J := вҲ§jвҲҲJ П„ j

Na, Оӣa, Ka Na = I(П„ a вүӨ В· ), Оӣa is the compensator of Na with respect to 

P and F[0 ,T ], and Ka = вҲ’ R В· 

> 0
> dNasвҲ’dОӣas
> 1вҲ’вҲҶОӣas

NJ , ОӣJ , KJ For multiple interventions: NJ = I(П„ J вүӨ В· ), ОӣJ is the com-pensator of NJ with respect to P and F[0 ,T ], and KJ =

вҲ’ R В· 

> 0
> dNJsвҲ’dОӣJs
> 1вҲ’вҲҶОӣJs

E(Ka), E(KJ ) The identifying likelihood ratio process; E(Ka)(= W ) in the single intervention case before Section 9, and E(KJ ) for multi-ple interventions, starting from Section 9 

Potential outcomes and outcomes of interest. 

> 81

ЛңN The potential outcome process (characterized in Appendix C; see also Definition 2) ЛңFT , ЛңF[0 ,T ] The Пғ-algebra and filtration generated by ЛңN on [0 , T ] before Section 9; generated by ( L, ЛңN ) on [0 , T ] starting from Section 9, and generated by ( U, L, ЛңN ) on [0 , T ] in Appendix C ЛҷY An optional outcome functional on a given canonical space (N XT , HXT ) under study; a stochastic process on ( N XT , HXT ) sat-isfying ЛҷYt(ПҶ) = ЛҷYt(ПҶ|t) for each t вҲҲ [0 , T ] and ПҶ вҲҲ N XT (see Section 4.4 and 9.1) 

Y The observed outcome of interest; Y := ЛҷY (N )ЛңY The potential outcome of interest; ЛңY := ЛҷY ( ЛңN )

F ЛңY  

> [0 ,T ]

The filtration {F t вҲЁ Пғ( ЛңY )}tвҲҲ[0 ,T ]82