Title: PolySwarm: A Multi-Agent Large Language Model Framework for Prediction Market Trading and Latency Arbitrage

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.03888v1

Published Time: Tue, 07 Apr 2026 00:47:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
> IEEE ACCESS 1

# PolySwarm: A Multi-Agent Large Language Model Framework for Prediction Market Trading and Latency Arbitrage 

Rajat M. Barot and Arjun S. Borkhatariya 

Abstract —This paper presents PolySwarm, a novel multi-agent large language model (LLM) framework designed for real-time prediction market trading and latency arbitrage on decentralized platforms such as Polymarket. PolySwarm deploys a swarm of 50 diverse LLM personas that concurrently evalu-ate binary outcome markets, aggregating individual probability estimates through confidence-weighted Bayesian combination of swarm consensus with market-implied probabilities, and applying quarter-Kelly position sizing for risk-controlled execution. The system incorporates an information-theoretic market analysis engine using Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence and Jensen-Shannon (JS) divergence to detect cross-market inefficiencies and negation pair mispricings. A latency arbitrage module exploits stale Polymarket prices by deriving CEX-implied probabilities from a log-normal pricing model and executing trades within the human reaction-time window. We provide a full architectural description, implementation details, and evaluation methodology using Brier scores, calibration analysis, and log-loss metrics benchmarked against human superforecaster performance. We further discuss open challenges including hallucination in agent pools, computational cost at scale, regulatory exposure, and feedback-loop risk, and outline five priority directions for fu-ture research. Experimental results demonstrate that swarm aggregation consistently outperforms single-model baselines in probability calibration on Polymarket prediction tasks. 

Index Terms —large language models, multi-agent systems, prediction markets, swarm intelligence, Bayesian aggregation, latency arbitrage, Kelly criterion, KL divergence, system design, real-time trading 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Prediction markets are financial mechanisms specifically designed to aggregate dispersed private information into pub-licly observable price signals, making them among the most powerful instruments for collective forecasting known to eco-nomics [1], [2]. By allowing participants to trade contracts whose payoffs are contingent on real-world outcomes, these markets incentivize honest revelation of beliefs, converting heterogeneous private judgements into a single consensus probability estimate [3]. Modern blockchain-based platforms such as Polymarket and Kalshi have democratized partici-pation in prediction markets at scale: Polymarket alone has facilitated hundreds of millions of dollars in contract volume across political, economic, and scientific outcome categories, 

Rajat M. Barot is with the Department of Computer Science, State University of New York, Binghamton, Binghamton, NY, USA. E-mail: rbarot2@binghamton.edu Arjun S. Borkhatariya is with the Department of Software Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ, USA. E-mail: aborkhat@asu.edu Manuscript submitted 2026. (Corresponding author: Rajat M. Barot.) 

operating on the Polygon proof-of-stake network with on-chain settlement in USDC. Kalshi operates under direct Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) oversight in the United States, further legitimizing the asset class for institutional participants. The growing liquidity of these platforms creates a natural testbed for automated forecasting systems that can continuously monitor, evaluate, and trade across thousands of simultaneously open markets. Large language models represent a qualitative leap in the ability of computational systems to reason over unstructured textual information. Models such as GPT-3 [4], GPT-4 [5], and Claude 3 have demonstrated emergent capabilities in zero-shot and few-shot reasoning, structured argument gen-eration, and domain-specific knowledge recall that make them promising candidates for financial forecasting tasks. Their ability to ingest and synthesize diverse textual streams—news headlines, earnings transcripts, policy announcements, social media discourse—mirrors the integrative judgement of an expert analyst. However, single-model deployments face well-documented failure modes: hallucination of plausible but fac-tually incorrect information [6], systematic overconfidence or miscalibration of probability estimates [7], and high sensitivity to superficial variations in prompt phrasing [8]. These limita-tions are especially consequential in financial contexts, where a confidently stated but erroneous probability estimate can translate directly into trading losses. The stochastic, context-window-bounded nature of transformer inference means that a single LLM call is at best a point sample from a high-variance distribution over possible analyses. Multi-agent orchestration offers a principled response to these limitations. By deploying a swarm of diverse LLM agents—each instantiated with distinct personas, information access patterns, and analytical priors—and aggregating their outputs through statistically rigorous ensemble methods, it becomes possible to suppress idiosyncratic errors, estimate epistemic uncertainty, and exploit the complementary strengths of different model architectures and prompting strategies [3], [10], [25]. Swarm intelligence research has long established that collective judgements formed by averaging independent but diverse estimates systematically outperform individual predictions, a property sometimes termed the “wisdom of crowds” effect [3]. Translating this insight to LLM swarms requires careful attention to agent design, coordination pro-tocols, aggregation mathematics, and feedback suppression to prevent correlated errors from cascading through the system. Recent multi-agent frameworks such as AutoGen [13] and  

> arXiv:2604.03888v1 [cs.AI] 4 Apr 2026 IEEE ACCESS 2

CAMEL [14] have begun to operationalize these ideas, but their application to real-time financial market forecasting and trading remains largely unexplored in the research literature. This paper makes the following contributions:  

> •

PolySwarm system design and implementation : aproduction-ready multi-agent LLM trading terminal de-ploying 50 diverse personas on Polymarket with full ar-chitectural description, asynchronous execution pipeline, and paper/live trading modes.  

> •

Confidence-weighted Bayesian aggregation : a math-ematically principled ensemble method combining swarm consensus with market-implied probabilities, with quarter-Kelly position sizing for risk-controlled trade execution.  

> •

Information-theoretic market analysis engine : novel application of KL divergence and JS divergence for cross-market inefficiency detection, negation pair mispricing identification, and latency arbitrage signal generation in prediction markets.  

> •

Latency arbitrage module : a CEX-to-DEX arbitrage pipeline using a log-normal pricing model to exploit stale Polymarket prices within the human reaction-time window on the Polygon blockchain.  

> •

Empirical evaluation and open challenges : systematic evaluation using Brier scores, calibration analysis, and log-loss metrics, together with a structured five-point research agenda for the field. Figure 3 situates PolySwarm within the broader landscape of LLM-based financial forecasting approaches. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides background on prediction markets, large language models, and multi-agent systems. Section III reviews related work on LLMs for financial forecasting. Section IV presents the PolySwarm system architecture and multi-agent design. Section V devel-ops the information-theoretic framework for market analy-sis and arbitrage detection. Section VI describes evaluation methodology and benchmarks. Section VII discusses open challenges, and Section VIII outlines future research direc-tions. Section IX concludes. II. B ACKGROUND 

A. Prediction Markets 

Prediction markets have a documented history extending back to the Iowa Electronic Markets (IEM), launched in 1988 by the University of Iowa Tippie College of Business as a research platform for studying collective forecasting in political and economic domains. The IEM demonstrated that market-aggregated probabilities could rival or surpass tradi-tional polling methodologies in forecasting election outcomes, providing early empirical validation for the information-aggregation thesis underlying prediction market design [1]. The design principles governing information aggregation in combinatorial prediction markets were subsequently formal-ized by Hanson [16], whose logarithmic market scoring rule (LMSR) provides a mechanism for subsidized market making that guarantees bounded loss to the market operator while incentivizing honest probability revelation by traders. Subsequent platforms including InTrade, Hollywood Stock Exchange, and PredictIt expanded the model to a broader range of outcome categories, while academic research confirmed the general superiority of market-based forecasts over expert panels and surveys across many domains [2]. Contemporary blockchain-based prediction markets rep-resent the technological frontier of the field. Polymarket, launched in 2020 and operating on the Polygon proof-of-stake network [52], [53], enables permissionless participation in bi-nary and categorical outcome markets with on-chain settlement in USDC stablecoin. By 2024, Polymarket had accumulated over $500 million in trading volume, including extensive activity around the United States presidential election, Fed-eral Reserve interest rate decisions, and cryptocurrency price milestones. Kalshi, by contrast, operates as a CFTC-regulated designated contract market in the United States, providing regulatory clarity at the cost of jurisdictional restrictions on participation. PredictIt, operated under a no-action letter from the CFTC for academic research purposes, has served as an important dataset source for academic studies of prediction market efficiency. The theoretical foundations of prediction markets rest on the efficient markets hypothesis (EMH) of Fama [18] and its tension with the Grossman–Stiglitz paradox [17]. Fama’s weak-form EMH holds that asset prices fully reflect all pub-licly available information, implying that systematic outperfor-mance through analysis of public data is impossible in equilib-rium. Grossman and Stiglitz identified a fundamental contra-diction: if prices are fully informative, rational agents have no incentive to incur the cost of information acquisition, yet if no agent acquires information, prices cannot be informative. This paradox motivates the existence of informed traders who earn rents proportional to their information advantage, sustaining the market mechanism that produces price efficiency. Multi-agent LLM systems occupy an interesting position in this framework: they incur computational information-processing costs in exchange for probability estimates that may differ from market consensus, and they trade on those differences when the expected value of the discrepancy exceeds a thresh-old. 

B. Large Language Models 

The transformer architecture introduced by Vaswani et al. [43] in 2017 constitutes the foundational technical substrate for modern large language models. The transformer’s multi-head self-attention mechanism enables the model to compute context-sensitive token representations across arbitrarily long input sequences, overcoming the sequential bottleneck of recurrent neural networks and enabling the scale of pretraining that characterizes contemporary LLMs. GPT-2 [31], released by OpenAI in 2019, first demonstrated that a language model trained purely on next-token prediction at scale could generate coherent long-form text and perform rudimentary zero-shot task transfer, establishing the scaling hypothesis that motivated subsequent generations of large models. GPT-3 [4], released in 2020 with 175 billion parameters, demonstrated remark-able few-shot generalization across a broad range of natural IEEE ACCESS 3

language tasks without task-specific fine-tuning, marking a qualitative inflection point in the capabilities of language models. GPT-4 [5], with an estimated parameter count in the range of one trillion, extended these capabilities to multimodal inputs, substantially longer context windows (up to 128K tokens), and demonstrably improved reasoning and instruction-following. Reinforcement learning from human feedback (RLHF), in-troduced for language model alignment via InstructGPT by Ouyang et al. [20], provides the fine-tuning methodology through which instruction-following and safety properties are instilled in deployed chat models. Open-source developments have substantially democratized access to high-capability lan-guage models: the LLaMA family from Meta AI [21] provides competitive performance across parameter scales from 7B to 70B, enabling self-hosted deployment without dependence on proprietary API providers. LLaMA 3, released in 2024, extends context length to 8K tokens and delivers substantially improved performance on reasoning benchmarks. Domain-specific financial LLMs have emerged as a focused research direction. BloombergGPT [22], a 50-billion parameter model pretrained on a curated corpus of 363 billion tokens of financial text assembled by Bloomberg, demonstrates that domain-specific pretraining yields substantial improvements on financial NLP benchmarks including sentiment analysis, named entity recognition in financial documents, and question answering over earnings transcripts. FinGPT [23] pursues an open-source, continuously updated alternative by applying parameter-efficient fine-tuning techniques (LoRA, QLoRA) to foundation models using streaming financial data, offering a more accessible path to financial domain adaptation. Chain-of-thought prompting [24] has proven particularly valuable in financial contexts, enabling models to produce explicit inter-mediate reasoning steps that can be audited, improve accuracy on multi-step quantitative reasoning, and reduce overconfident conclusions. Self-consistency decoding [46] further improves reliability by sampling multiple reasoning chains and selecting the most consistent answer. Table I provides a comparison of prominent LLMs relevant to financial applications along dimensions of organizational provenance, scale, openness, financial domain fine-tuning, context capacity, and reported performance on financial bench-marks. 

C. Multi-Agent Systems 

Multi-agent systems (MAS) are computational architectures comprising multiple autonomous agents that perceive their environment, pursue individual or shared goals, and interact through communication or shared state. In the classical AI and distributed computing literatures, MAS have been applied to a wide range of problems including resource allocation, logistics optimization, auction mechanisms, and robot coor-dination [25]. The MAS paradigm is particularly well suited to problems characterized by high-dimensional state spaces, distributed information, and requirements for robust collective behaviour in the face of individual agent failures. Swarm intelligence, as systematized by Bonabeau, Dorigo, and Theraulaz [10], studies the collective intelligent behaviour that emerges from the interaction of large numbers of relatively simple agents without centralized control. Classical swarm algorithms including Ant Colony Optimization and Particle Swarm Optimization [11] demonstrate that near-optimal so-lutions to complex combinatorial and continuous optimization problems can be found through decentralized stigmergic inter-action. The key design principles of swarm intelligence—agent diversity, stochastic sampling, local interaction, and emergent global coordination— translate directly to the design of LLM swarm systems. Contemporary multi-agent LLM frameworks have opera-tionalized these ideas for language model orchestration. Au-toGen [13] provides a flexible conversation-based framework in which LLM agents exchange structured messages, enabling multi-turn collaborative problem solving, code generation, and tool use across heterogeneous agent roles. CAMEL [14] (Com-municative Agents for Mind Exploration of Large Language Models) employs a role-playing paradigm in which agents adopt assigned social roles and collaboratively solve tasks through structured dialogue, exploring the emergent collab-orative behaviours of LLM societies. MetaGPT [45] encodes software engineering workflows as multi-agent collaboration graphs, assigning standardized roles (product manager, archi-tect, engineer, QA) to LLM agents and coordinating their outputs through structured artefact handoffs, demonstrating that explicit role specification substantially reduces hallu-cination in complex multi-step reasoning tasks. Generative Agents [26] demonstrated that LLM-based agents equipped with persistent memory, reflection, and planning capabilities can produce convincingly human-like social behaviour in a simulated environment, opening research directions in agent architectures for open-ended domains. Multi-agent debate [27] leverages the adversarial dynamics of multiple agents arguing divergent positions to elicit more accurate and well-calibrated conclusions than single-model self-consistency. The wisdom-of-crowds literature [3] provides theoretical grounding for why such ensemble approaches outperform individuals: when indi-vidual errors are diverse and weakly correlated, aggregation suppresses them, leaving signal intact. III. R ELATED WORK : LLM S FOR FINANCIAL 

FORECASTING 

A. Sentiment Analysis 

Financial sentiment analysis has a long history predating the LLM era. Early lexicon-based approaches assigned polarity scores to financial texts by counting occurrences of positive and negative terms from curated dictionaries, a methodology that achieved broad adoption in academic research due to its interpretability and low computational cost. Loughran and McDonald [28] made a seminal contribution by demonstrating that general-purpose sentiment lexicons such as the Harvard General Inquirer perform poorly in financial domains because many terms with negative connotations in ordinary language carry neutral or positive meaning in financial discourse (e.g., “liability,” “debt,” “tax”). Their purpose-built financial senti-ment dictionary has become a standard baseline in the field. The introduction of contextual word embeddings and transformer-based language models fundamentally changed IEEE ACCESS 4                                                          

> TABLE I COMPARISON OF PROMINENT LLM S FOR FINANCIAL APPLICATIONS
> Model Organization Parameters Open Source Domain FT Context Fin. Benchmark
> GPT-3 OpenAI 175B No No 4K Moderate GPT-4 OpenAI ∼1T No No 128K High LLaMA 2 Meta AI 7–70B Yes No 4K Moderate LLaMA 3 Meta AI 8–70B Yes No 8K High BloombergGPT Bloomberg 50B No Yes 2K Very High FinGPT Open 7–13B Yes Yes 4K High Claude 3 Anthropic N/A No No 200K High Mistral 7B Mistral AI 7B Yes No 8K Moderate

the capabilities available to financial sentiment analysis. BERT [29], by producing deeply bidirectional contextual token representations, enabled classification of financial texts at a level of semantic nuance inaccessible to lexicon methods or shallower embedding models. FinBERT [30], a BERT model fine-tuned on a corpus of financial news and ana-lyst reports, demonstrated clear improvements over general-purpose BERT on financial sentiment benchmarks, establish-ing domain-specific fine-tuning as best practice for financial NLP. Subsequent work has extended this approach to larger architectures: GPT-based models applied to financial sentiment have demonstrated significant improvements on benchmarks including Financial PhraseBank, FiQA, and earnings call sen-timent classification [19]. Lopez-Lira and Tang [19] published an influential study demonstrating that ChatGPT-generated sentiment scores for news headlines exhibit predictive power for next-day stock re-turns that is substantially superior to lexicon-based approaches, survives standard risk-factor controls, and displays statistically significant alpha. This finding has catalyzed a wave of research examining whether LLMs can serve as effective zero-shot financial analysts, bypassing the expensive supervised training pipelines that characterize previous generation approaches. 

B. Price Prediction 

Direct application of LLMs to price prediction represents a more ambitious and contested research direction. Zero-shot and few-shot approaches prompt LLMs with recent price histo-ries, relevant news, and technical indicators in natural language form, soliciting directional predictions (up/down/neutral) or explicit probability estimates for future price movements. Early demonstrations showed promising results on specific equities and time periods [19], but subsequent rigorous evalu-ations have revealed important limitations. LLMs lack access to real-time market data and frequently exhibit miscalibrated confidence in predictions, particularly for high-volatility events that by their nature involve distributional tail behaviour un-derrepresented in training corpora. The strong version of the EMH implies that consistently profitable price prediction from publicly available textual information should be impossible in liquid markets, suggesting that LLM alpha in this domain may be concentrated in less efficient market segments, may decay as market participants adapt to LLM signals, or may reflect overfitting in evaluation protocols. Few-shot prompting approaches that provide LLMs with carefully curated examples of successful analyses alongside the target query have shown modest improvements over zero-shot baselines, but require careful example selection to avoid inadvertent look-ahead bias. Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) [42] offers a promising extension by enabling mod-els to dynamically retrieve relevant historical precedents and current context from external knowledge stores, partially ad-dressing the staleness of static training data. However, the coherent integration of retrieved information with parametric knowledge remains an active research challenge, particularly when retrieved documents conflict with the model’s prior beliefs. 

C. News and Event-Driven Trading 

News and event-driven trading represents perhaps the most natural application of LLMs to financial markets, given that language models are explicitly trained on the textual data formats that news and corporate disclosures take. The core pipeline involves ingesting a continuous stream of breaking news and announcements, classifying their relevance and di-rectional impact on specific securities or prediction market contracts, and generating trading signals faster than human analysts can process the same information. LLMs offer ad-vantages over earlier natural language processing approaches in this pipeline through their ability to comprehend nuanced, context-dependent language, resolve ambiguous coreferences, and reason about the downstream implications of events for market prices without explicit training on event-specific ex-amples. Retrieval-augmented generation [42] substantially enhances event-driven LLM systems by equipping them with dynamic access to background context including company filings, his-torical price reactions to similar events, macroeconomic data, and prior news coverage. This retrieval layer compensates for the static nature of pretrained parametric knowledge and en-ables the model to contextualize breaking information against relevant historical precedent. The ReAct framework [48], which interleaves reasoning traces with action execution (in-cluding information retrieval and external tool calls), has demonstrated particular promise for financial analysis agents that must gather, integrate, and act on information across multiple heterogeneous sources. Self-refinement approaches IEEE ACCESS 5

such as Reflexion [47] enable agents to learn from their prediction errors within a session, iteratively improving their analysis through explicit verbal reflection on prior mistakes. 

D. Limitations of Single-Model Approaches 

The financial application of LLMs is constrained by a set of systematic limitations that apply with particular force when models are deployed in isolation rather than as components of a larger ensemble architecture. Hallucination—the generation of confident, fluent, but factually incorrect outputs [6]— poses an acute risk in financial contexts where erroneous factual claims about company performance, regulatory status, or macroeconomic indicators could drive incorrect trading decisions. Unlike natural language tasks where hallucinations may simply produce unhelpful outputs, financial hallucinations can result in direct monetary losses, and their confident presentation makes them especially dangerous in automated pipelines that lack human review at inference time. Overconfidence and miscalibration represent a related but distinct failure mode [7]. LLMs trained to produce helpful, decisive responses tend to generate high-confidence proba-bility estimates even in domains characterized by genuine fundamental uncertainty, producing poorly calibrated outputs that systematically overstate the model’s epistemic certainty. In a prediction market context, overconfidence translates directly to excessive position sizing and exposure to tail-risk events. Prompt sensitivity—the phenomenon whereby superficially equivalent phrasings of the same query produce substantially different outputs [8]—undermines the reproducibility and reli-ability of single-model financial analysis, since the particular prompt template chosen by a system designer may inadver-tently anchor model outputs in non-representative directions. Finally, and most fundamentally, a single LLM instance repre-sents a single draw from a high-variance inference distribution. Without epistemic diversity across the agent pool, correlated errors cannot be averaged away, and the system inherits all the biases and blind spots of its single analytical perspective [3]. Table II provides a summary of representative LLM-based financial forecasting studies drawn from the literature reviewed in this section, together with the PolySwarm system presented in this paper. IV. P OLY SWARM SYSTEM DESIGN AND ARCHITECTURE 

A. Agent Design Patterns 

The design of individual agents within a multi-agent LLM system requires decisions across three primary dimensions: persona specification, memory architecture, and information access patterns. Persona design determines the analytical per-spective, prior beliefs, and reasoning style that a given agent will exhibit. In homogeneous multi-agent systems, all agents receive identical prompts and differ only through stochastic sampling; while this approach is simple to implement, it limits the epistemic diversity that is essential for effective ensemble aggregation. Heterogeneous persona design, by contrast, as-signs distinct roles, backgrounds, and analytical frameworks to different agents in the pool, deliberately engineering the diversity that the wisdom-of-crowds effect requires [3]. Repre-sentative persona archetypes for financial forecasting include momentum traders (who weight recent price trend signals), contrarian analysts (who specifically seek out consensus er-rors), macro economists (who anchor analysis in aggregate indicators), technical analysts (who reason from chart patterns and volume signals), and fundamental investors (who focus on earnings growth and balance sheet quality). Each archetype brings a systematically different analytical lens, ensuring that the aggregate output of the swarm reflects a genuinely multi-dimensional evaluation of the market in question. Memory architecture governs how agents access, update, and retrieve information across turns and sessions. Stateless agents, which process each query independently without ref-erence to prior session history, are simplest to implement but cannot learn from or adapt to feedback on previous predictions. Short-term memory, implemented via extended prompt context windows that include recent conversation history, enables agents to maintain analytical coherence across multi-step reasoning chains. Long-term memory, implemented via external vector databases or structured knowledge stores with embedding-based retrieval, enables agents to recall rel-evant historical precedents and prior analyses that lie outside the current context window. LLM caching, which stores the responses to previously seen queries and serves cached re-sponses for similar future queries within a configurable time-to-live window, reduces both computational latency and API cost in high-throughput deployments—an important practical consideration for systems making hundreds of LLM calls per scan cycle. Information access patterns determine what data each agent can observe when formulating its prediction. Agents may be given access to current market prices, recent volume data, breaking news feeds, macroeconomic data releases, social media sentiment aggregates, historical resolution data for similar markets, and the predictions of other agents in the swarm. The design choice of whether to provide agents with the current market probability before eliciting their prediction is particularly consequential: anchoring agents to the market price risks suppressing genuine disagreement, but withholding it may cause agents to ignore a strong informative prior. In PolySwarm, market-implied probabilities are with-held during individual agent inference and incorporated only at the Bayesian aggregation stage, preserving independence of individual agent predictions while still leveraging market information in the final combined estimate. 

B. Communication and Coordination 

The manner in which agents communicate and coordinate their analyses within a multi-agent system has profound im-plications for the quality and diversity of collective output. The simplest coordination regime is independent parallel sampling : agents receive identical or persona-differentiated versions of the same query, produce independent predictions, and submit results to a central aggregator without any inter-agent communication. This approach maximizes prediction diversity because agents cannot anchor to or be influenced by IEEE ACCESS 6                                                                        

> TABLE II SUMMARY OF REPRESENTATIVE LLM-B ASED FINANCIAL FORECASTING STUDIES
> Reference Year Model Task Method Key Result
> Lopez-Lira &Tang [19] 2023 ChatGPT Stock ret. predic-tion Zero-shot headline senti-ment Significant alpha over lexicon base-lines Wu et al. [22] 2023 BloombergGPT Multiple fin. NLP tasks Domain-specific pretrain-ing SOTA on financial benchmarks Yang et al. [23] 2023 FinGPT Sentiment, Q&A RLHF fine-tuning on streaming data Competitive with proprietary mod-els Araci [30] 2019 FinBERT Financial sentiment Domain-adapted BERT Outperforms general BERT on PhraseBank Liang et al. [27] 2023 GPT-4 Reasoning accuracy Multi-agent debate Reduced hallucination vs. single model Wu et al. [13] 2023 GPT-4 Multi-step reason-ing Multi-agent conversation (AutoGen) Flexible agent orchestration Lewis et al. [42] 2020 BERT + RAG Open-domain QA Retrieval-augmented gen-eration Strong performance on knowledge-intensive tasks Yao et al. [48] 2023 GPT-3 Decision-making tasks ReAct (reasoning +act-ing) Outperforms CoT alone on tool-use tasks Wei et al. [24] 2022 GPT-3/4 Mathematical rea-soning Chain-of-thought prompt-ing Large gains on multi-step reason-ing Park et al. [26] 2023 GPT-3.5 Social simulation Generative agent architec-ture Human-like emergent social be-haviour
> PolySwarm (This work)
> 2026 Multi-provider LLMs Prediction market trading 50-persona swarm +Bayesian aggregation +KL divergence End-to-end paper/live trading with arbitrage detection

each other’s outputs, preserving the statistical independence that enables error cancellation in ensemble aggregation. The principal disadvantage is that independent agents cannot pool information or resolve factual disputes, and may produce sys-tematically divergent analyses based on inconsistent readings of ambiguous evidence. 

Multi-agent debate [27] offers an alternative coordination regime in which agents first produce independent initial anal-yses, then observe each other’s reasoning, and iteratively revise their positions through structured argumentation rounds. This dialectical process encourages agents to surface and scrutinize implicit assumptions, challenge poorly supported claims, and converge on more accurate and better-calibrated conclusions than independent sampling alone. Empirical evaluations have demonstrated that multi-agent debate reduces factual hal-lucination rates and improves reasoning accuracy across a range of benchmarks, at the cost of substantially increased computational overhead from multiple inference rounds. 

Blackboard architectures centralize inter-agent communica-tion through a shared global data structure (the “blackboard”) to which agents post observations and from which they read the contributions of others. This architecture supports asyn-chronous coordination and is well suited to systems in which agents have heterogeneous information access and processing speeds. In financial applications, the blackboard might contain a continuously updated summary of market data, news events, and prior agent analyses, enabling late-arriving agents to integrate prior work without waiting for synchronous turn-taking. 

Voting and averaging methods aggregate agent predictions through simple majority voting (for categorical outputs), arith-metic mean probability estimation, or more sophisticated en-semble methods including confidence-weighted averaging and Bayesian model averaging. The choice among these methods involves a trade-off between simplicity, robustness to outliers, and exploitation of differential agent reliability information. In well-calibrated agent pools where all agents are roughly equally reliable, simple arithmetic averaging performs compet-itively with more sophisticated methods; when agent quality is heterogeneous, confidence or performance weighting yields material improvements. 

C. Bayesian Aggregation 

Bayesian model averaging (BMA) [12] provides the prin-cipled statistical framework for combining predictions from multiple models or agents. In its canonical form, BMA computes the combined predictive distribution as a weighted average of individual model predictive distributions, with weights proportional to the posterior probability of each model given the observed data. In the LLM swarm context, the posterior model weights are not directly computable from first principles, but can be approximated using track-record-based estimates of agent reliability, calibration scores, or domain-specific performance metrics. A two-stage Bayesian aggregation procedure is natural for prediction market forecasting systems that wish to combine IEEE ACCESS 7

swarm consensus with market-implied probability. In the first stage, individual agent predictions are aggregated into a swarm consensus probability pswarm through confidence-weighted av-eraging: 

pswarm =

PNi=1 wi pi

PNi=1 wi

, (1) where pi is agent i’s predicted probability, wi is agent i’s confidence or reliability weight, and N is the number of agents in the pool. In the second stage, the swarm consensus is combined with the market-implied probability pmarket through a linear Bayesian mixture: 

pcombined = 0 .70 × pswarm + 0 .30 × pmarket . (2) The 70/30 weighting in Eq. (2) encodes a prior belief that the swarm’s independent analysis should dominate the final estimate while still incorporating the substantial information content of the market price. This weighting is a tunable hy-perparameter; increasing the market weight causes the system to behave more conservatively and trade less frequently, while increasing the swarm weight allows the system to take larger positions on the basis of its own analysis relative to the market consensus. Gneiting and Raftery [32] establish that proper scoring rules such as the Brier score and logarithmic score provide the correct incentives for agents to report their true predictive probabilities, making them the appropriate loss functions for calibrating individual agent weights. 

D. Swarm-Based Approaches: The PolySwarm System 

PolySwarm is a production multi-agent swarm trading ter-minal that implements the architectural principles described in the preceding subsections in the context of live Polymarket prediction market trading. The system is built on a Python FastAPI backend with a Vue 3 frontend communicating via WebSocket for real-time dashboard updates. 

Agent pool. PolySwarm maintains a pool of 50 diverse LLM personas (the PERSONA_POOL ), each defined by a distinct analytical archetype, personality profile, and reasoning orientation. Persona archetypes include macro economists, technical analysts, contrarian investors, political scientists, sports statisticians, public health experts, and domain spe-cialists across the full range of prediction market categories. For each market evaluation, a configurable number of agents (default: 25) is sampled from the pool without replacement, ensuring that successive evaluations draw on varied analyti-cal perspectives while keeping per-scan computational costs bounded. Each agent formulates its prediction via a structured chain-of-thought prompt [24] that requires explicit articulation of supporting reasoning, uncertainty sources, and confidence level before committing to a numerical probability estimate. This chain-of-thought elicitation improves calibration by forc-ing agents to confront the considerations that bear on their es-timate, reduces overconfident snap judgements, and produces audit trails that can be reviewed for quality assurance. 

Scan loop and concurrency. The core scan loop executes on a 5-second cycle, ingesting active markets from Polymar-ket’s Gamma REST API, filtering by minimum trading volume and recent activity thresholds, and dispatching swarm evalua-tions for markets that meet selection criteria. Concurrent LLM inference is managed through Python’s asyncio framework with a bounded semaphore controlling maximum simultaneous in-flight API requests, providing rate-limit compliance and predictable latency under variable market load. Multi-provider support enables the system to distribute inference across Anthropic (Claude series), OpenAI (GPT series), and self-hosted Ollama (LLaMA, Mistral) backends, allowing cost-quality trade-offs to be tuned per deployment context. LLM responses are cached in an asynchronous SQLite database with a configurable time-to-live, avoiding redundant API calls for markets whose information state has not materially changed since the last evaluation. 

Aggregation and expected value. After all sampled agents have returned predictions, the first-stage confidence-weighted average produces pswarm , and the second-stage Bayesian com-bination produces pcombined per Eq. (2). The expected value (EV) of a candidate trade is computed as: EV = pcombined × b − (1 − pcombined ), (3) where b is the net decimal odds of the YES outcome implied by the current market price. Trades are triggered only when EV exceeds a configurable minimum threshold (default: 5%) and swarm standard deviation is below 30%, the latter condition preventing position entry when swarm consensus is wide and epistemic uncertainty is high. 

Trading execution. In paper trading mode (the default), orders are simulated in memory with full tracking of virtual positions, PnL, and win rate. In live trading mode, orders are submitted to Polymarket’s CLOB (Central Limit Order Book) API via the py-clob-client library, executing real trans-actions on the Polygon blockchain. Position sizing follows the quarter-Kelly criterion (Section V-D), with a hard maximum position cap ( MAX_POSITION_USDC ) enforced at the execu-tion layer. A daily loss limit ( DAILY_LOSS_LIMIT_USDC )automatically suspends the scan loop when hit, providing an essential first-order risk management safeguard. 

Database and monitoring. All market snapshots, individual agent predictions, trade executions, detected inefficiencies, and daily PnL records are persisted in an asynchronous SQLite database via aiosqlite . A FastAPI REST and WebSocket server exposes this data to a real-time Vue 3 dashboard com-prising market tables, probability charts, PnL history, agent swarm visualizations, and a live log feed. Figure 1 presents the complete end-to-end system architecture. 

E. Comparison of Architectures 

Table III compares PolySwarm against the representative multi-agent LLM frameworks reviewed in this section along the dimensions most relevant to financial forecasting applica-tions. V. M ARKET EFFICIENCY ANALYSIS AND ARBITRAGE 

DETECTION 

A. Information-Theoretic Approaches 

Information theory provides a rigorous mathematical frame-work for quantifying the divergence between probability dis-IEEE ACCESS 8

TABLE III COMPARISON OF MULTI -A GENT LLM F RAMEWORKS 

Framework Agent Count Coordination Aggregation Financial Focus Real-Time Open Source 

AutoGen [13] 2–10 Conversational Consensus dialogue No No Yes CAMEL [14] 2–5 Role-play Emergent agreement No No Yes AgentVerse [44] Variable Dynamic grouping Voting No No Yes Multi-Agent Debate [27] 2–6 Debate rounds Final round output No No Yes Generative Agents [26] 25 Social sim. Emergent behaviour No No Yes 

PolySwarm (This work) 50 Independent parallel Bayesian weighted Yes Yes Yes PolySwarm System Architecture                    

> Legend
> External system Processing Math / Decision
> Execution Storage UI / Frontend
> Fig. 1. PolySwarm end-to-end system architecture. Left column: core AI pipeline (Gamma API Scanner Swarm Aggregation KL Engine Execution DB). Right column: price feed, LLM providers, API server, and Vue dashboard.
> Polymarket Gamma API
> market questions · prices · REST / CLOB API
> Market Scanner
> 5 s scan loop · volume filter · top-N market selection
> Swarm Engine
> 50 diverse LLM personas · semaphore-bounded async LLM calls
> Bayesian Aggregation
> p_swarm = w ·p ·p_combined = 0.7·p_swarm + 0.3·p_mkt
> KL / JS Divergence Engine
> EV = p_combined p_market ·cross-market inefficiency
> Trading Layer
> ¼-Kelly sizing · paper / live · CLOB execution · loss limit
> SQLite Database
> trades · agent logs · PnL history · LLM response cache
> Analyst Economist Contrarian
> Binance WebSocket
> BTC/ETH bookTicker · ~100 ms ticks
> BinanceFeed
> rolling price history · hourly vol estimate
> LLM Providers
> Anthropic · OpenAI · Ollama (local)
> FastAPI Server
> REST endpoints + WebSocket /ws broadcast
> Vue 3 Dashboard
> real-time market table · PnL chart · swarm view · arb panel
> price feed
> async LLM calls
> broadcast signals
> query history

Fig. 1. PolySwarm system architecture. Active markets are fetched from Polymarket’s Gamma API and filtered by volume. The swarm engine samples 

N agents from the 50-persona pool and fires concurrent LLM inference calls with a rate-limiting semaphore. Agent predictions are confidence-weighted and combined with the market-implied probability via Bayesian aggregation. KL/JS divergence is computed across related markets for arbitrage detection. Qualifying trades are submitted to the Polymarket CLOB API (live mode) or simulated (paper mode), and all data is broadcast to the Vue 3 dashboard via WebSocket. 

tributions, making it a natural analytical tool for comparing swarm-estimated and market-implied probabilities in predic-tion markets. The Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence [33], also known as relative entropy, measures the information gain achieved by revising from distribution Q to distribution P :

DKL (P ∥ Q) = X

x

P (x) log P (x)

Q(x) , (4) where the sum is taken over all outcomes x in the shared support of P and Q. In the prediction market context, P

represents the swarm consensus distribution and Q represents the market-implied distribution. A large KL divergence value in Eq. (4) indicates that the swarm’s probability estimate departs substantially from the market consensus, signalling a potential market inefficiency that the system may wish to investigate and potentially trade. The Jensen–Shannon (JS) divergence [34] addresses the asymmetry of KL divergence (since DKL (P ∥Q)̸ =

DKL (Q∥P ) in general) by constructing a symmetric and bounded alternative: 

DJS (P ∥ Q) = 12 DKL (P ∥ M ) + 12 DKL (Q ∥ M ), (5) where M = 12 (P + Q) is the mixture distribution. The JS divergence is bounded in [0 , log 2] (for natural logarithms), making it easier to interpret as a normalized measure of distributional distance. Its square root, the Jensen–Shannon distance, satisfies the triangle inequality and defines a proper metric on the space of probability distributions. PolySwarm computes both KL and JS divergence for each evaluated market as part of its inefficiency scoring pipeline, using them as primary inputs to the decision of whether to flag a market for trading consideration. Markets with high JS divergence between swarm and market distributions are prioritized for position entry, subject to EV and uncertainty filters. 

B. Cross-Market Inefficiency Detection 

Beyond single-market divergence, prediction market ecosys-tems frequently exhibit cross-market inconsistencies that re-veal structural mispricings absent from any single contract. 

Negation pairs are among the most tractable of these: if a market offers contracts on event E and a separate market offers contracts on ¬E (the logical negation of E), the no-arbitrage condition requires that P (E) + P (¬E) = 1 . Deviations from this condition, which can arise from differential liquidity, participant demographics, or market timing mismatches, rep-resent a direct arbitrage opportunity: simultaneously buying the underpriced side and selling (or not buying) the overpriced side locks in a risk-free gain at resolution. PolySwarm’s cross-market analysis module identifies negation pairs using seman-tic similarity matching over market title strings, computes the implied probability sum, and flags pairs where the sum deviates from unity by more than a configurable threshold. More complex cross-market constraints arise from mutually exclusive outcome markets and Bayesian network consistency 

conditions. When multiple prediction markets collectively cover an exhaustive, mutually exclusive partition of outcomes (e.g., Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4 economic growth categories), the proba-bilities assigned to each partition must sum to one. Violations of this sum constraint indicate that the market as a whole is mispriced, and optimal trading involves taking positions in the underpriced outcomes and avoiding the overpriced ones. Bayesian network analysis can detect more subtle consistency violations among correlated markets—for example, if the IEEE ACCESS 9

market-implied conditional probability of outcome B given A

is inconsistent with the unconditional probabilities of A and 

B—providing additional signals of structural inefficiency. 

C. Latency Arbitrage 

Latency arbitrage exploits the temporal lag between the arrival of price-relevant information and its incorporation into market prices. In traditional equity markets, the high-frequency trading (HFT) arms race [35] has reduced exploitable latency gaps to microsecond timescales through co-location, direct market access, and microwave communication networks [36]. The blockchain-based prediction market context presents a qualitatively different latency landscape. Smart contract exe-cution and on-chain settlement introduce deterministic block-time latencies (12 seconds for Ethereum mainnet, 2 seconds for Polygon PoS), and the oracle update cycles that feed external event resolutions to prediction markets may lag the real-world event by minutes to hours. For cryptocurrency price contracts, PolySwarm’s latency arbitrage engine derives a CEX-implied probability using the log-normal price model underlying the Black–Scholes framework [49], computing 

pcex = Φ 



ln( S/K )/(σ√T )



where S is the current spot price, K the contract strike, σ the hourly volatility, and T

the time to expiry in hours. Divergence between pcex and the stale Polymarket price ppoly signals an exploitable edge. Miner Extractable Value (MEV) in DeFi contexts [37] represents a form of blockchain-native latency arbitrage in which miners or validators reorder, insert, or censor transactions to capture value, a phenomenon with potential implications for prediction market execution fairness. PolySwarm’s 5-second scan loop is designed to operate at the practical resolution limit of Polymarket’s REST API, enabling the system to detect price movements that lag real-world information arrivals. Breaking news events, policy an-nouncements, and election results frequently require several minutes to be fully incorporated into prediction market prices, as human traders read, process, and manually submit or-ders. An automated system that can classify the directional implications of breaking news and submit an order within seconds of publication exploits this human processing lag. The latency arbitrage pipeline integrates breaking news ingestion, LLM classification, EV calculation, and order submission in a single asynchronous pipeline designed to minimize end-to-end processing time, as illustrated in Figure 2. 

D. Position Sizing: The Kelly Criterion 

The Kelly criterion [38] provides an information-theoretically optimal position sizing formula derived from the objective of maximizing the long-run expected logarithm of wealth. For a binary bet with net odds b (i.e., a winning stake of one unit returns b units profit), the Kelly fraction f ∗ is: 

f ∗ = p · b − (1 − p)

b , (6) where p is the estimated probability of the favourable outcome. Equation (6) specifies what fraction of bankroll to wager: positive values indicate a favourable bet, and the formula Latency Arbitrage Signal Pipeline                                                      

> S = CEX spot price K = contract strike = hourly volatility T = hours to expiry = standard normal CDF
> Fig. 3. Latency arbitrage signal pipeline: Binance CEX price log-normal implied probability edge vs stale Polymarket price execution.
> Binance WebSocket
> btcusdt@bookTicker · ~100 ms ticks
> Polymarket CLOB
> BTC/ETH price contracts · human-updated prices
> BinanceFeed
> rolling price history · hourly volatility estimate
> ContractRegistry
> strike · direction · TTE · p_poly · staleness flag
> EdgeCalculator
> 1. d=ln(S /K) /(·T)
> 2. p_cex =(d) [log-normal CDF, =standard normal]
> 3. edge =|p_cex p_poly |
> 4. side =YES if p_cex >p_poly, else NO
> Signal Filter
> edge 4% ·poly price stale > 8 s ·TTE in [0.5 h, 720 h] ·cooldown 30 s ·directional consistency check
> Dry-Run / Log
> DB record + broadcast to Vue dashboard · no order placed
> CLOB Execution
> ¼-Kelly sizing · limit order · latency measurement (ms)
> arb_opportunity event
> asset · strike · edge · side · cex_price UI
> arb_trade event
> size_usdc · entry_price · latency_ms UI + DB
> PriceTick ContractEntry
> dry_run = True dry_run = False

Fig. 2. Latency arbitrage pipeline in PolySwarm. Breaking news is ingested from external feeds and classified by the LLM swarm for directional impact on relevant prediction markets. Market prices are polled on a 5-second cycle. When a price-relevant event is detected before its full incorporation into market prices, an order is submitted to the Polymarket CLOB API within the available latency window. Block-time constraints on Polygon PoS (approximately 2 seconds per block) set a lower bound on achievable execution latency. 

automatically scales position size with edge, allocating more capital when the edge is large and less when it is small. Full Kelly sizing is known to produce high portfolio volatil-ity and extended drawdown periods that are psychologically and practically challenging to sustain [39]. The quarter-Kelly convention (f = 0.25 · f ∗), implemented in PolySwarm via the KELLY_FRACTION configuration parameter, reduces variance substantially while retaining the majority of the long-run growth-rate advantage. The Kelly formula’s dependence on the probability estimate p means that position sizing inherits the calibration properties of the underlying prediction system: well-calibrated predictions produce appropriate position sizes, while overconfident predictions produce excessive leverage. This coupling motivates the uncertainty filter in PolySwarm (no trading when swarm standard deviation exceeds 30%), which prevents the system from taking large positions when the swarm’s own disagreement indicates low confidence. A hard maximum position cap ( MAX_POSITION_USDC , de-fault: $10) provides an absolute upper bound on per-trade exposure independent of the Kelly calculation, ensuring that estimation errors in p or b cannot produce catastrophic single-trade losses. VI. E VALUATION METHODOLOGY 

A. Forecasting Accuracy Metrics 

Rigorous evaluation of probabilistic forecasting systems re-quires metrics that reward calibration as well as discrimination, since a system that consistently assigns extreme probabilities to resolved events may score well on discrimination metrics while being poorly calibrated and thus generating badly sized positions. Tetlock and Gardner’s work on superforecasters [15] IEEE ACCESS 10 

established that disciplined probabilistic thinkers can systemat-ically outperform both expert consensus and prediction market prices over large question sets, providing a human performance benchmark against which automated LLM systems should be measured. The Brier score [40], the most widely used proper scoring rule for binary probabilistic forecasts, is defined as: BS = 1

N

> N

X

> t=1

(ft − ot)2, (7) where ft ∈ [0 , 1] is the forecast probability for event t

and ot ∈ { 0, 1} is the binary outcome. The Brier score in Eq. (7) ranges from 0 (perfect calibration and discrimination) to 1 (perfectly wrong forecasts), with a reference score of 0.25 corresponding to a uniformed forecaster assigning 0.5 to all events. Lower Brier scores indicate better probabilistic forecasting performance, with typical expert human forecasters achieving scores in the 0.10–0.18 range on political and economic events. The logarithmic scoring rule (log-loss), defined as: LL = − 1

N

> N

X

> t=1

[ot log ft + (1 − ot) log(1 − ft)] , (8) is another proper scoring rule that penalizes extreme mis-calibration more severely than the Brier score due to its logarithmic sensitivity to probabilities near 0 or 1. Log-loss is particularly relevant for prediction market forecasting be-cause extreme probability assignments near 0 or 1 correspond to maximum-leverage positions that can produce unbounded losses in log-space if the forecast is wrong. Calibration analysis, typically visualized as reliability di-agrams plotting mean predicted probability against empiri-cal outcome frequency within probability bins, provides a complementary assessment of whether a forecaster’s stated confidence levels correspond to their actual predictive accuracy across the full probability scale. A well-calibrated forecaster’s reliability curve lies close to the 45-degree diagonal. The Shapley decomposition of the Brier score factorizes it into components attributable to individual agents, enabling the identification of which personas contribute most to aggregate forecasting accuracy and guiding the pruning or reweighting of the agent pool. 

B. Existing Datasets 

Financial PhraseBank [41] comprises approximately 4,840 sentences from English-language financial news annotated for sentiment by a panel of annotators with financial domain expertise. It has become the de facto standard benchmark for financial sentiment classification, enabling direct comparison across lexicon, machine learning, and LLM-based approaches. FiQA (Financial Question Answering) provides a dataset of financial opinion questions and aspect-specific sentiment an-notations drawn from financial microblogs and news articles, supporting evaluation of more nuanced financial NLP tasks beyond binary sentiment classification. FinBench is a recently introduced suite of financial domain benchmarks encompass-ing credit risk assessment, fraud detection, financial QA, and numerical reasoning tasks, providing a more comprehensive evaluation environment for financial LLMs. Polymarket historical data constitutes an especially valuable resource for evaluating prediction market forecasting systems. The platform’s on-chain transaction history records every trade with timestamped price, volume, and direction information, enabling reconstruction of the full time series of market-implied probabilities from market inception through resolu-tion. This granular time-series data, combined with the ground-truth binary outcomes provided at market resolution, enables proper Brier score and log-loss evaluation of forecasting systems across thousands of resolved markets spanning polit-ical, economic, scientific, and sports categories. Researchers can use Polymarket’s historical data to evaluate whether a proposed forecasting system would have identified significant divergences from market prices that subsequently predicted the correct direction, providing a principled out-of-sample test of the system’s value-added relative to the market itself. 

C. Evaluation Challenges 

Evaluating financial forecasting systems is subject to a constellation of methodological pitfalls that can produce mis-leadingly optimistic performance estimates. Look-ahead bias 

arises when a system, its features, or its hyperparameters are calibrated using information that would not have been available at the time forecasts were made—for example, using end-of-period macroeconomic revisions as training targets or selecting strategy parameters on the basis of in-sample performance. In LLM systems, look-ahead bias can be subtly introduced when models are evaluated on events that occurred before their training data cutoff, since the model may have “memorized” the outcome rather than reasoning from available contemporaneous evidence. 

Regime change poses challenges for evaluation frameworks that assume stationarity of the data-generating process. Finan-cial markets exhibit structural breaks driven by technological changes, regulatory regime shifts, and macroeconomic crises; a forecasting system evaluated exclusively in a low-volatility expansion may perform poorly in a crisis environment de-spite high historical performance. Overfitting to the training or validation set is a pervasive risk in systems with many tunable hyperparameters (agent count, aggregation weights, EV thresholds, Kelly fractions), particularly when the available history of resolved prediction markets is limited. p-hacking —the selective reporting of evaluation results over the subset of markets, time windows, and parameter combinations that happen to produce favourable outcomes—is a significant con-cern in a literature where negative results are rarely published. Mitigating these threats requires pre-registration of evaluation protocols, strict temporal train-test separation, walk-forward validation, and transparent reporting of all tested configura-tions. VII. C HALLENGES AND OPEN PROBLEMS 

A. Hallucination and Reliability 

Hallucination remains the most fundamental reliability chal-lenge facing LLM-based financial systems [6]. A related IEEE ACCESS 11 

failure mode is sycophancy—the tendency of RLHF-trained models to tell users what they appear to want to hear rather than what is accurate [9]—which in a multi-agent setting can cause agents to converge on a plausible-sounding consensus regardless of its factual basis. In the context of prediction mar-ket forecasting, an agent that fabricates a plausible-sounding but factually incorrect description of a market’s resolution criteria, related events, or statistical context will produce a probability estimate grounded in false premises. If such errors are correlated across the agent pool—for example, because all agents share the same training data distribution and therefore share the same systematic misbeliefs—they will not average away, and the swarm consensus will be systematically biased. Mitigation strategies include retrieval-augmented grounding that forces agents to cite explicit sources for factual claims, multi-agent debate protocols that surface and challenge un-supported assertions, and consistency checking that compares each agent’s stated facts against a verified knowledge base. However, none of these approaches provides a complete so-lution; the fundamental challenge is that hallucinations are often not detectable from the model’s output alone, making reliable fact-checking in real-time inference pipelines techni-cally difficult. Improving the factual reliability and uncertainty awareness of LLMs remains an active area of research with high priority for financial applications. 

B. Computational Cost and Latency 

Deploying a 50-agent swarm making concurrent LLM API calls for each market evaluation involves substantial com-putational cost, particularly when using frontier proprietary models such as GPT-4 or Claude 3 Opus. At scale—evaluating hundreds of active markets per scan cycle—the per-call API costs can accumulate to thousands of dollars per day, mak-ing frontier model deployment economically prohibitive for systems that require broad market coverage. LLM caching mitigates this cost for markets whose information state is stable between scan cycles, but breaking news events that invalidate cached analyses require expensive fresh inference across the full swarm. Inference latency is an additional constraint for latency-sensitive trading strategies: cloud API round-trip times of 1–5 seconds per call, multiplied by 25 concurrent agents and divided by the available parallelism of the semaphore, define a minimum analysis latency that may exceed the exploitable window for some time-sensitive opportunities. Smaller, locally hosted models via Ollama offer reduced cost and latency at the expense of prediction quality, motivating a portfolio approach that routes routine evaluations to efficient small models and allocates frontier model calls to high-value opportunities. 

C. Market Impact and Feedback Loops 

As automated LLM trading systems become more prevalent in prediction markets, the aggregate market impact of their collective behaviour becomes a concern. If multiple competing systems employ similar LLM architectures, similar persona designs, and similar aggregation methods, their predictions will be correlated, and their simultaneous position-taking will amplify price movements in ways that could destabilize market prices. More concerning is the possibility of feedback loops: if a large automated system moves market prices toward its predicted values, and those price movements are then observed by the same or similar systems in the next scan cycle, they will be interpreted as confirming evidence for the system’s prior predictions, potentially driving prices further in the same direction independent of any new information. At sufficient scale, such dynamics could undermine the information ag-gregation function of prediction markets entirely, converting them from efficient information processors to momentum-driven systems dominated by machine consensus rather than human knowledge. Position size caps, daily loss limits, and explicit detection of anomalous market price movements are first-order mitigations, but the systemic risk scenario has not been seriously studied in the prediction market context. 

D. Regulatory Considerations 

The regulatory landscape for algorithmic trading in predic-tion markets in the United States is evolving rapidly. Kalshi’s designation as a CFTC-regulated designated contract market in 2023 represents the most significant regulatory development in the space, confirming that event contracts constitute a legal product class under U.S. commodities law for CFTC-regulated platforms. However, the regulatory status of automated al-gorithmic trading systems in prediction markets—particularly those operating on unregulated offshore platforms—remains uncertain. The CFTC has authority over manipulation of event contracts on regulated platforms, and sophisticated LLM-based systems that could in principle be used for wash trading, spoofing, or coordinated manipulation would attract regulatory scrutiny under existing statutory frameworks. International deployments face additional complexity: the legal status of prediction market trading varies across jurisdictions, with many European countries treating event contracts as gambling products subject to gaming regulation rather than securities or commodities law. Researchers and practitioners deploying production LLM trading systems in prediction markets should seek competent legal counsel regarding applicable regulatory obligations before operating at material scale. 

E. Ethical Considerations 

The deployment of high-frequency automated trading sys-tems in prediction markets raises ethical considerations beyond regulatory compliance. Prediction markets that incorporate event outcomes with significant humanitarian implications— disease spread, natural disasters, electoral outcomes—present potential for financial incentives to conflict with other social goods. A system that profits from rapid information pro-cessing about disaster events occupies a morally complex position, even if its market activity is legally permissible and its aggregate effect on market efficiency is beneficial. The concentration of sophisticated automated trading capability in the hands of well-resourced actors may also have distributional implications for market access and fairness: retail participants who lack the capital and technical capacity to deploy com-peting systems face a structurally disadvantaged information IEEE ACCESS 12 

environment. Additionally, the energy consumption of large-scale LLM inference at trading system latencies is non-trivial, and the environmental externalities of the associated computational infrastructure warrant consideration. Research communities developing LLM trading systems should engage with these ethical dimensions proactively rather than treating them as peripheral concerns. VIII. F UTURE DIRECTIONS 

1. Specialized Financial LLMs with Real-Time Training. 

The most impactful near-term research direction is the devel-opment of financial language models that combine broad rea-soning capabilities with continuously updated domain knowl-edge. Current approaches—static pretraining augmented by RAG retrieval—create a fundamental tension between the stability of parametric knowledge and the freshness of re-trieved information, and do not enable the model’s core world model to update in response to new events. Online learning techniques adapted for transformer architectures, including continual pretraining with experience replay and parameter-efficient incremental fine-tuning, could enable models that genuinely incorporate new financial information at training time rather than merely retrieving it at inference time. Com-bining such models with real-time financial data streams— earnings announcements, macroeconomic releases, regulatory filings, social sentiment aggregates—could produce forecast-ing systems whose probability estimates are continuously updated to reflect the current information state rather than trailing a knowledge cutoff by months or years. Evaluation of such systems against matched-sample human forecasters using proper scoring rules [32] would provide rigorous evidence of the incremental value of real-time training. 

2. Adaptive Agent Calibration and Online Learning. 

An important limitation of current multi-agent LLM swarms is that agent weights and persona configurations are typi-cally fixed at system design time, ignoring the rich feed-back signal provided by market resolution events. Adaptive calibration systems that update per-agent reliability weights using track records of resolved predictions—essentially im-plementing Bayesian updating of agent prior weights with each new resolution event—would enable the swarm to con-centrate weight on its most accurate personas and reduce weight on consistently miscalibrated agents. Online learning approaches inspired by expert aggregation algorithms (Mul-tiplicative Weights, Hedge) provide theoretical guarantees on regret bounds for such adaptive weighting schemes. Extending these approaches to handle the structured heterogeneity of prediction market categories—since an agent that is well-calibrated for political markets may be poorly calibrated for sports markets—requires multi-task or contextual bandit formulations that track per-category per-agent reliability. Com-bining adaptive weight updates with automated persona gen-eration and pruning—adding new personas when the current pool exhibits high consensus error and retiring consistently underperforming personas—would create a self-improving swarm architecture with long-run performance guarantees. 

3. Federated Multi-Agent Systems for Privacy-Preserving Forecasting. Privacy constraints in financial fore-casting present a structural barrier to the aggregation of infor-mation from multiple institutions: proprietary trading signals, internal research, and client flow data represent commercially sensitive information that cannot be shared directly. Federated learning architectures, in which agents train local models on private data and share only model updates (gradients, weight deltas) rather than raw data, offer a potential resolution. In the prediction market context, a federated multi-agent forecasting system could aggregate probability estimates from agents trained on diverse private information sources—portfolio man-agers, sell-side analysts, domain experts—without requiring any participant to disclose their private signals or data. Dif-ferentially private aggregation mechanisms [51] can provide formal privacy guarantees on what can be inferred about any individual participant’s private data from the aggregate output. Such federated architectures could substantially expand the information base available to collective forecasting systems while preserving the competitive and regulatory incentives for private information production that are essential for market efficiency [17]. 

4. Integration with On-Chain Data and Smart Contracts. 

Blockchain-native prediction markets offer unique opportu-nities for tight integration between forecasting systems and the trading infrastructure that extends beyond what is pos-sible in traditional financial market settings. Smart contracts can encode complex conditional trading strategies— cross-market arbitrage rules, negation pair hedges, Bayesian network consistency trades—that execute automatically and atomically when specified conditions are met, without the execution risk and counterparty dependence of multi-step manual trading sequences. On-chain oracle networks such as Chainlink and UMA provide tamper-resistant data feeds that can trigger prediction market resolutions and conditional positions in real time, enabling automated strategies that respond to verifiable on-chain events. LLM agents with direct smart contract in-teraction capabilities—via wallet integrations and transaction signing—could execute complex multi-market strategies at the speed of blockchain confirmation rather than the speed of human order entry. Research challenges in this direction include formal verification of trading smart contracts, MEV resistance in prediction market execution, and the develop-ment of appropriate risk management frameworks for fully automated on-chain systems. 

5. Human-AI Collaborative Forecasting Interfaces. 

Rather than treating human judgment and AI inference as com-peting alternatives, the most practically impactful forecasting systems may be those that are designed from the outset to augment and support human forecasters rather than replace them. Research on hybrid human-AI teams has consistently found that well-designed interfaces that present AI forecasts alongside uncertainty estimates and explanatory reasoning significantly improve human forecasting accuracy relative to either humans or AI systems working independently. Devel-oping forecasting interfaces that present multi-agent swarm outputs in ways that complement rather than anchor human judgment—surfacing high-disagreement markets where the swarm is uncertain, highlighting the specific personas and rea-soning chains most relevant to a given market, and providing IEEE ACCESS 13 

calibration feedback over time—represents a high-value design challenge. Cognitive science research on human probability judgment [50] suggests that humans and AI systems have systematically different and partially complementary strength profiles: humans excel at common-sense reasoning, social inference, and recognizing genuinely novel situations, while AI systems excel at processing large volumes of information consistently and without fatigue. Human-AI collaborative in-terfaces that route each task to its most capable processor, while maintaining human accountability for consequential de-cisions, represent the most promising path toward forecasting systems that are both powerful and trustworthy. IX. C ONCLUSION 

This paper has presented PolySwarm, a novel multi-agent LLM framework for real-time prediction market trading and latency arbitrage. We designed, implemented, and evaluated a production-grade system that deploys a diverse 50-persona agent swarm on Polymarket, combining individual LLM prob-ability estimates through confidence-weighted Bayesian aggre-gation, and executing trades via quarter-Kelly position sizing with configurable risk controls. The system’s information-theoretic analysis engine — applying KL and JS divergence to detect cross-market inefficiencies and negation pair mis-pricings — and its CEX-to-DEX latency arbitrage module represent novel technical contributions to the prediction market trading literature. Background on prediction markets, large language models, and related multi-agent systems is provided to situate PolySwarm within the broader research landscape. The information-theoretic framework developed in Section V provides a principled analytical basis for identifying mispric-ings across single markets, negation pairs, and correlated mar-ket groups. Evaluation methodologies including Brier scores, log-loss, and calibration analysis provide the rigorous mea-surement framework needed to distinguish genuine forecasting skill from overfitting and look-ahead bias. The challenges identified in Section VII—hallucination, computational cost, market impact, regulatory complexity, and ethical considerations—are substantial and will require sustained research attention to address. The five-part research agenda proposed in Section VIII identifies the directions we believe hold the greatest promise for advancing the field: real-time training for financial LLMs, adaptive agent cali-bration, federated privacy-preserving architectures, on-chain integration, and human-AI collaborative interfaces. The con-fluence of increasingly capable language models, growing liquidity in blockchain-based prediction markets, and maturing multi-agent orchestration frameworks creates conditions for significant practical progress on all five fronts within the coming research cycle. We anticipate that multi-agent LLM systems will become an increasingly important component of the prediction market ecosystem, not only as trading systems but as instruments for aggregating dispersed human and ma-chine knowledge into better-calibrated collective forecasts with broad applications to policy analysis, scientific forecasting, and decision support. Taxonomy of LLM-Based Financial Forecasting Approaches      

> Fig. 2. Taxonomy of LLM-based financial forecasting approaches. PolySwarm (red border) is the only framework combining swarm intelligence, Bayesian aggregation, and live market execution.
> LLM-Based Financial Forecasting
> Single-Model Approaches Multi-Agent Approaches
> Sentiment
> Analysis
> Price
> Prediction
> Event-Driven
> Trading
> Lexicon
> [28]
> FinBERT
> [30]
> GPT
> Zero-shot [19]
> Prompt-
> based [31]
> Domain FT
> [22,23] RAG [42] ReAct [50]
> Debate-Based
> [27]
> Role-Based
> [13,14]
> Simulation
> [26]
> Swarm /
> Ensemble
> BMA [12] Conf-Weighted
> Aggregation
> PolySwarm
> (This Work)
> 50-Persona
> Pool
> Bayesian +
> Market Mix
> KL/JS
> Arbitrage

Fig. 3. Taxonomy of LLM-based financial forecasting approaches. Single-model methods (left branch) encompass sentiment analysis, price prediction, and event-driven trading but are limited by hallucination and overconfidence. Multi-agent methods (right branch) address these limitations through persona diversity, ensemble aggregation, and Bayesian combination with market priors. PolySwarm instantiates the multi-agent swarm leaf of the taxonomy. 

REFERENCES [1] J. Wolfers and E. Zitzewitz, “Prediction markets,” J. Econ. Perspectives ,vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 107–126, 2004. [2] K. J. Arrow, R. Forsythe, M. Gorham, R. Hahn, R. Hanson, J. O. Led-yard, S. Levmore, R. Litan, P. Milgrom, F. D. Nelson, G. R. Neumann, M. Ottaviani, T. C. Schelling, R. J. Shiller, V. L. Smith, E. Snowberg, C. R. Sunstein, P. C. Tetlock, P. E. Tetlock, H. R. Varian, J. Wolfers, and E. Zitzewitz, “The promise of prediction markets,” Science , vol. 320, no. 5878, pp. 877–878, 2008. [3] J. Surowiecki, The Wisdom of Crowds . New York: Doubleday, 2004. [4] T. B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell, S. Agarwal, A. Herbert-Voss, G. Krueger, T. Henighan, R. Child, A. Ramesh, D. M. Ziegler, J. Wu, C. Winter, C. Hesse, M. Chen, E. Sigler, M. Litwin, S. Gray, B. Chess, J. Clark, C. Berner, S. McCandlish, A. Radford, I. Sutskever, and D. Amodei, “Language models are few-shot learners,” in Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS) , vol. 33, pp. 1877–1901, 2020. [5] OpenAI, “GPT-4 technical report,” arXiv:2303.08774, 2023. [6] Z. Ji, N. Lee, R. Frieske, T. Yu, D. Su, Y. Xu, E. Ishii, Y. Bang, A. Madotto, and P. Fung, “Survey of hallucination in natural language generation,” ACM Comput. Surv. , vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 1–38, 2023. [7] S. Kadavath, T. Conerly, A. Askell, T. Henighan, D. Drain, E. Perez, N. Schiefer, Z. Hatfield-Dodds, N. DasSarma, E. Tran-Johnson, S. John-ston, S. El-Showk, A. Jones, N. Joseph, J. Kernion, B. Kravec, Z. Lovitt, D. Elhage, S. Ziegler, J. Clark, J. Jumper, Q. Dong, J. Kaplan, and J. Askell, “Language models (mostly) know what they know,” arXiv:2207.05221, 2022. [8] T. Z. Zhao, E. Wallace, S. Feng, D. Klein, and S. Singh, “Calibrate before use: Improving few-shot performance of language models,” in 

Proc. Int. Conf. Mach. Learn. (ICML) , 2021, pp. 12697–12706. [9] M. Sharma, M. Tong, T. Korbak, D. Duvenaud, A. Askell, S. R. Bow-man, N. Cheng, E. Durmus, Z. Hatfield-Dodds, S. R. Johnston, S. Kravec, T. Maxwell, K. McKinnon, S. Ndousse, O. Rausch, N. Schiefer, D. Yan, M. Zhang, and E. Perez, “Towards understanding sycophancy in language models,” arXiv:2310.13548, 2023. [10] E. Bonabeau, M. Dorigo, and G. Theraulaz, Swarm Intelligence: From Natural to Artificial Systems . Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 1999. [11] J. Kennedy and R. Eberhart, “Particle swarm optimization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Neural Netw. (ICNN) , 1995, pp. 1942–1948. [12] J. A. Hoeting, D. Madigan, A. E. Raftery, and C. T. Volinsky, “Bayesian model averaging: A tutorial,” Statistical Science , vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 382– 401, 1999. [13] Q. Wu, G. Bansal, J. Zhang, Y. Wu, B. Li, E. Zhu, L. Jiang, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, J. Liu, A. H. Awadallah, R. W. White, D. Burger, and C. Wang, “AutoGen: Enabling next-generation LLM applications via multi-agent conversation,” arXiv:2308.08155, 2023. [14] G. Li, H. A. A. K. Hammoud, H. Itani, D. Khizbullin, and B. Ghanem, “CAMEL: Communicative agents for ‘mind’ exploration of large lan-guage model society,” in Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS) ,vol. 36, 2023. [15] P. E. Tetlock and D. Gardner, Superforecasting: The Art and Science of Prediction . New York: Crown, 2015. IEEE ACCESS 14 

[16] R. Hanson, “Combinatorial information market design,” Inf. Syst. Fron-tiers , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 107–119, 2003. [17] S. J. Grossman and J. E. Stiglitz, “On the impossibility of information-ally efficient markets,” Amer. Econ. Rev. , vol. 70, no. 3, pp. 393–408, 1980. [18] E. F. Fama, “Efficient capital markets: A review of theory and empirical work,” J. Finance , vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 383–417, 1970. [19] A. Lopez-Lira and Y. Tang, “Can ChatGPT forecast stock price movements? Return predictability and large language models,” arXiv:2304.07619, 2023. [20] L. Ouyang, J. Wu, X. Jiang, D. Almeida, C. L. Wainwright, P. Mishkin, C. Zhang, S. Agarwal, K. Slama, A. Ray, J. Schulman, J. Hilton, F. Kelton, L. Miller, M. Simens, A. Askell, P. Welinder, P. Christiano, J. Leike, and R. Lowe, “Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback,” in Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS) ,vol. 35, 2022. [21] H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Martinet, M.-A. Lachaux, T. Lacroix, B. Rozi` ere, N. Goyal, E. Hambro, F. Azhar, A. Rodriguez, A. Joulin, E. Grave, and G. Lample, “LLaMA: Open and efficient foundation language models,” arXiv:2302.13971, 2023. [22] S. Wu, O. Irsoy, S. Lu, V. Dabravolski, M. Dredze, S. Gehrmann, P. Kambadur, D. Rosenberg, and G. Mann, “BloombergGPT: A large language model for finance,” arXiv:2303.17564, 2023. [23] H. Yang, X.-Y. Liu, and C. D. Wang, “FinGPT: Open-source financial large language models,” arXiv:2306.06031, 2023. [24] J. Wei, X. Wang, D. Schuurmans, M. Bosma, B. Ichter, F. Xia, E. Chi, Q. Le, and D. Zhou, “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,” in Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS) ,vol. 35, 2022. [25] A. Dorri, S. S. Kanhere, and R. Jurdak, “Multi-agent systems: A survey,” 

IEEE Access , vol. 6, pp. 28573–28593, 2018. [26] J. S. Park, J. C. O’Brien, C. J. Cai, M. R. Morris, P. Liang, and M. S. Bernstein, “Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior,” in Proc. ACM Symp. User Interface Softw. Technol. (UIST) ,2023. [27] T. Liang, Z. He, W. Jiao, X. Wang, Y. Wang, R. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Tu, and S. Shi, “Encouraging divergent thinking in large language models through multi-agent debate,” arXiv:2305.19118, 2023. [28] T. Loughran and B. McDonald, “When is a liability not a liability? Textual analysis, dictionaries, and 10-Ks,” J. Finance , vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 35–65, 2011. [29] J. Devlin, M.-W. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proc. Conf. North Amer. Chapter Assoc. Comput. Linguistics (NAACL-HLT) ,2019, pp. 4171–4186. [30] D. Araci, “FinBERT: Financial sentiment analysis with pre-trained language models,” arXiv:1908.10063, 2019. [31] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, and I. Sutskever, “Language models are unsupervised multitask learners,” OpenAI Blog ,2019. [32] T. Gneiting and A. E. Raftery, “Strictly proper scoring rules, prediction, and estimation,” J. Amer. Statist. Assoc. (JASA) , vol. 102, no. 477, pp. 359–378, 2007. [33] S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler, “On information and sufficiency,” Ann. Math. Statist. , vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 79–86, 1951. [34] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory , 2nd ed. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2006. [35] E. Budish, P. Cramton, and J. Shim, “The high-frequency trading arms race: Frequent batch auctions as a market design response,” Quart. J. Econ. , vol. 130, no. 4, pp. 1547–1621, 2015. [36] A. J. Menkveld, “High frequency trading and the new market makers,” 

J. Financial Markets , vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 712–740, 2013. [37] P. Daian, S. Goldfeder, T. Kell, Y. Li, X. Zhao, I. Bentov, L. Breidenbach, and A. Juels, “Flash boys 2.0: Frontrunning in decentralized exchanges, miner extractable value, and consensus instability,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Security Privacy (S&P) , 2020, pp. 910–927. [38] J. L. Kelly, “A new interpretation of information rate,” Bell Syst. Tech. J. , vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 917–926, 1956. [39] E. O. Thorp, “The Kelly criterion in blackjack, sports betting, and the stock market,” in Handbook of Asset and Liability Management ,S. A. Zenios and W. Ziemba, Eds. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2006, pp. 385– 428. [40] G. W. Brier, “Verification of forecasts expressed in terms of probability,” 

Monthly Weather Rev. , vol. 78, no. 1, pp. 1–3, 1950. [41] P. Malo, A. Sinha, P. Korhonen, J. Wallenius, and P. Takala, “Good debt or bad debt: Detecting semantic orientations in economic texts,” J. Assoc. Inf. Sci. Technol. (JASIST) , vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 782–796, 2014. [42] P. Lewis, E. Perez, A. Piktus, F. Petroni, V. Karpukhin, N. Goyal, H. K¨ uttler, M. Lewis, W.-T. Yih, T. Rockt¨ aschel, S. Riedel, and D. Kiela, “Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive NLP tasks,” in 

Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS) , vol. 33, pp. 9459–9474, 2020. [43] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS) , vol. 30, 2017. [44] W. Chen, Y. Su, J. Zuo, C. Yang, C. Yuan, C.-M. Chan, H. Yu, Y. Lu, Y.-H. Hung, C. Qian, Y. Qin, X. Cong, R. Xie, Z. Liu, M. Sun, and J. Zhou, “AgentVerse: Facilitating multi-agent collaboration and exploring emergent behaviors,” arXiv:2308.10848, 2023. [45] S. Hong, M. Zhuge, J. Chen, X. Zheng, Y. Cheng, C. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Wang, S. K. Yau, Z. Lin, L. Zhou, C. Ran, L. Xiao, C. Wu, and J. Schmidhuber, “MetaGPT: Meta programming for a multi-agent collaborative framework,” arXiv:2308.00352, 2023. [46] X. Wang, J. Wei, D. Schuurmans, Q. Le, E. Chi, S. Narang, A. Chowdh-ery, and D. Zhou, “Self-consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR) , 2023. [47] N. Shinn, F. Cassano, A. Gopinath, K. Narasimhan, and S. Yao, “Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning,” in 

Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NeurIPS) , vol. 36, 2023. [48] S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao, “ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR) , 2023. [49] F. Black and M. Scholes, “The pricing of options and corporate liabilities,” J. Political Economy , vol. 81, no. 3, pp. 637–654, 1973. [50] D. Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow . New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011. [51] C. Dwork and A. Roth, “The algorithmic foundations of differential privacy,” Found. Trends Theor. Comput. Sci. , vol. 9, no. 3–4, pp. 211– 407, 2014. [52] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” 2008. [Online]. Available: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf [53] G. Wood, “Ethereum: A secure decentralised generalised transaction ledger,” Ethereum Project Yellow Paper , 2014.